arXiv:1708.06374v6  [cs.RO]  27 Oct 2018










On a Formal Model of Safe and Scalable Self-driving Cars

   Shai Shalev-Shwartz, Shaked Shammah, Amnon Shashua
                     Mobileye, 2017


        Abstract
        In recent years, car makers and tech companies have been racing towards self driving cars. It seems that the main
      parameter in this race is who will have the first car on the road. The goal of this paper is to add to the equation two
      additional crucial parameters. The first is standardization of safety assurance — what are the minimal requirements
      that every self-driving car must satisfy, and how can we verify these requirements. The second parameter is scalability
      — engineering solutions that lead to unleashed costs will not scale to millions of cars, which will push interest in
      this field into a niche academic corner, and drive the entire field into a “winter of autonomous driving”. In the first
      part of the paper we propose a white-box, interpretable, mathematical model for safety assurance, which we call
      Responsibility-Sensitive Safety (RSS). In the second part we describe a design of a system that adheres to our safety
      assurance requirements and is scalable to millions of cars.

1 Introduction

The “Winter of AI” is commonly known as the decades long period of inactivity following the collapse of Artificial
Intelligence research that over-reached its goals and hyped its promise until the inevitable fall during the early 80s.
We believe that the development of Autonomous Vehicles (AV) is dangerously moving along a similar path that might
end in great disappointment after which further progress will come to a halt for many years to come.
    The challenges posed by most current approaches are centered around lack of safety guarantees, and lack of
scalability. Consider the issue of guaranteeing a multi-agent safe driving (“Safety”). Given that society will unlikely
tolerate road accident fatalities caused by machines, guarantee of Safety is paramount to the acceptance of autonomous
vehicles. Ultimately, our desire is to guarantee zero accidents, but this is impossible since multiple agents are typically
involved in an accident and one can easily envision situations where an accident occurs solely due to the blame of
other agents (see Fig. 1 for illustration). In light of this, the typical response of practitioners of autonomous vehicle is
to resort to a statistical data-driven approach where Safety validation becomes tighter as more mileage is collected.
    To appreciate the problematic nature of a data-driven approach to Safety, consider first that the probability of a
fatality caused by an accident per one hour of (human) driving is known to be 10−6. It is reasonable to assume that for
society to accept machines to replace humans in the task of driving, the fatality rate should be reduced by three orders
of magnitude, namely a probability of 10−9 per hour1. In this regard, attempts to guarantee Safety using a data-driven
statistical approach, claiming increasing superiority as more mileage is driven, are naive at best. The amount of data
required to guarantee a probability of 10−9 fatality per hour of driving is proportional to its inverse, 109 hours of data
(see details in the sequel), which is roughly in the order of thirty billion miles. Moreover, a multi-agent system interacts
        2
with its environment and thus cannot be validated offline , thus any change to the software of planning and control
will require a new data collection of the same magnitude — clearly unwieldy. Finally, developing a system through
data invariably suffers from lack of transparency, interpretability, and explainability of the actions being taken — if
an autonomous vehicle kills someone, we need to know the reason. Consequently, a model-based approach to Safety
is required but the existing ”functional safety” and ASIL requirements in the automotive industry are not designed to
   1This estimate is inspired from the fatality rate of air bags and from aviation standards. In particular, 10−9 is the probability that a wing will
spontaneously detach from the aircraft in mid air.
   2unless a realistic simulator emulating real human driving with all its richness and complexities such as reckless driving is available, but the
problem of validating the simulator is even harder than creating a Safe autonomous vehicle agent — see Section 2.


    1

cope with multi-agent environments. Hence the need for a formal model of Safety which is one of the goals of this
paper.
    The second area of risk lies with lack of scalability. The difference between autonomous vehicles and other
great science and technology achievements of the past is that as a “science project” the effort is not sustainable and
will eventually lose steam. The premise underlying autonomous vehicles goes beyond “building a better world” and
instead is based on the premise that mobility without a driver can be sustained at a lower cost than with a driver.
This premise is invariably coupled with the notion of scalability — in the sense of supporting mass production of
autonomous vehicles (in the millions) and more importantly of supporting a negligible incremental cost to enable
driving in a new city. Therefore the cost of computing and sensing does matter, if autonomous vehicles are to be mass
manufactured, the cost of validation and the ability to drive “everywhere” rather than in a select few cities is also a
necessary requirement to sustain a business.
    The combined issues of Safety and Scalability contain the risk of “Winter of autonomous vehicles”. The goal of
this paper is to provide a formal model of how Safety and Scalability are pieced together into an autonomous vehicles
program that society can accept and is scalable in the sense of supporting millions of cars driving anywhere in the
developed countries.
    The contribution of this paper is twofold. On the Safety front we introduce a model called “Responsibility Sensitive
Safety” (RSS) which formalizes an interpretation of “Duty of Care” from Tort law. The Duty of Care states that
an individual should exercise “reasonable care” while performing acts that could harm others. RSS is a rigorous
mathematical model formalizing an interpretation of the law which is applicable to self-driving cars. RSS is designed
to achieve three goals: first, the interpretation of the law should be sound in the sense that it complies with how
humans interpret the law. While we are at it we would like also to prove “utopia” — meaning that if all agents follow
RSS’s interpretation then there will be zero accidents. Second, the interpretation should lead to a useful driving policy,
meaning it will lead to an agile driving policy rather than an overly-defensive driving which inevitably would confuse
other human drivers and will block traffic and in turn limit the scalability of system deployment; third, the interpretation
should be efficiently verifiable in the sense that we can rigorously prove that the self-driving car implements correctly
the interpretation of the law. The last property is not obvious at all because there could be many interpretations
which are not analytically verifiable because of “butterfly effects” where a seemingly innocent action could lead to an
accident of the agent’s fault in the longer future.
    As highlighted in Fig. 1, guaranteeing that an agent will never be involved in an accident is impossible. Hence, our
ultimate goal is to guarantee that an agent will be careful enough so as it will never be part of the cause of an accident.
In other words, the agent should never cause an accident and should be cautious enough so as to be able to compensate
for reasonable mistakes of other drivers. Also noteworthy, is that the definition of RSS is agnostic to the manner in
which it is implemented — which is a key feature to facilitate our goal of creating a convincing global safety model.
    Our second contribution evolves around the introduction of a “semantic” language that consists of units, measure-
ments, and action space, and specification as to how they are incorporated into Planning, Sensing and Actuation of the
autonomous vehicles. To get a sense of what we mean by Semantics, consider how a human taking driving lessons is
instructed to think about “driving policy”. These instructions are not geometric — they do not take the form “drive
13.7 meters at the current speed and then accelerate at a rate of 0.8 m/s2”. Instead, the instructions are of a semantic
nature — “follow the car in front of you” or “overtake that car on your left”. The language of human driving policy is
about longitudinal and lateral goals rather than through geometric units of acceleration vectors. We develop a formal
Semantic language and show that the Semantic model is crucial on multiple fronts connected to the computational
complexity of Planning that do not scale up exponentially with time and number of agents, to the manner in which
Safety and Comfort interact, to the way the computation of sensing is defined and the specification of sensor modal-
ities and how they interact in a fusion methodology. We show how the resulting fusion methodology (based on the
semantic language) guarantees the RSS model to the required 10−9 probability of fatality, per one hour of driving,
while performing only offline validation over a dataset of the order of 105 hours of driving data.
    Specifically, we show that in a reinforcement learning setting we can define the Q function3 over actions defined
over a semantic space in which the number of trajectories to be inspected at any given time is bounded by 104 regardless
of the time horizon used for Planning. Moreover, the signal to noise ratio in this space is high, allowing for effective
   3A function evaluating the long term quality of performing an action a ∈ A when the agent is at state s ∈ S. Given such a Q-function, the
natural choice of an action is to pick the one with highest quality, π(s) = argmaxa Q(s, a).


    2

machine learning approaches to succeed in modeling the Q function. In the case of computation of sensing, Semantics
allow to distinguish between mistakes that affect Safety versus those mistakes that affect the Comfort of driving. We
define a PAC model4 for sensing which is tied to the Q function and show how measurement mistakes are incorporated
into Planning in a manner that complies with RSS yet allows to optimize the comfort of driving. The language of
semantics is shown to be crucial for the success of this model as other standard measures of error, such as error with
respect to a global coordinate system, do not comply with the PAC sensing model. In addition, the semantic language
is also a critical enabler for defining HD-maps that can be constructed using low-bandwidth sensing data and thus be
constructed through crowd-sourcing and support scalability.
    To summarize, we propose a formal model that covers all the important ingredients of an autonomous vehicle:
sense, plan and act. The model guarantees that from a Planning perspective there will be no accidents which are
caused by the autonomous vehicle, and also through a PAC sensing model guarantees that, with sensing errors, a
fusion methodology we present will require only offline data collection of a very reasonable magnitude to comply
with our Safety model. Furthermore, the model ties together Safety and Scalability through the language of semantics,
thereby providing a complete methodology for a safe and scalable autonomous vehicles. Finally, it is worth noting
that developing an accepted safety model that would be adopted by the industry and regulatory bodies is a necessary
condition for the success of autonomous vehicles — and it is better to do it earlier rather than later. An early adoption
of a safety model will enable the industry to focus resources along a path that will lead to acceptance of autonomous
vehicles. Our RSS model contains parameters whose values need to be determined through discussion with regulatory
bodies and it would serve everyone if this discussion happens early in the process of developing autonomous vehicles
solutions.

1.1 Safety: Functional versus Nominal
When dealing about safety it is important to bear in mind the distinction between functional versus nominal safety.
Functional Safety (FuSa) refers to the integrity of the operation in an electrical (i.e. HW/SW) subsystem that is operat-
ing in a safety critical domain. Functional Safety is concerned with a failure in HW or bugs in the SW that could lead
to a safety hazard. For the automotive industry this is well covered by ISO 26262 which defines different Automotive
Safety Integrity Levels (ASIL) that provide Failure In Time (FIT) targets for HW and also define systematic processes
for how SW should be defined, developed and tested such that it conforms with good systems engineering practices.
These include the rigorous maintenance of requirements and traceability from those requirements to different safety
goals of the system.
    However, the most Functionally Safe vehicle in the world can still crash into everyone and everything due to bad
logic in the code that results in an unsafe driving decision. Functional Safety cannot help us here; instead this is the
domain of Nominal safety. Nominal safety is the concern of whether the AV is making safe logical decisions assuming
that the HW and SW systems are operating error free (i.e. are functionally safe). Functional Safety then is a necessary,
but not sufficient measure of safety assurance when it comes to evaluating the safety of an AV. In fact, there exists
no nominal safety standard for the safe decision making capabilities of an AV. In the remainder of this paper, it is the
nominal safety we focus on.

1.2 Safety: Sense/Plan/Act Methodology
Automated Vehicles are robotic systems and contain three primary stages of functionality: Sense, Plan and Act.
Sensing is the ability to accurately perceive the environment around the vehicle. Planning, commonly referred to as
driving policy, is where decisions are made about what strategic (i.e. change lanes) and tactical (i.e. overtake the blue
car) decisions to take. Acting is the issuance of the decision (translated into mathematical trajectories and velocities)
to the various actuators within the vehicle to perform the driving decision. The focus of the paper is on the sensing
and planning parts (since the acting part is by and large well understood by control theory).
    Mistakes that might lead to accidents can stem from sensing errors or planning errors. Validation of Sensing
   4Probably Approximate Correct (PAC), borrowing Valiant’s PAC-learning terminology.




    3

systems can be efficiently performed offline5 through the use of large ground truth data sets and sensing errors can
be mitigated through redundant sensing modalities that ensure there are at least two independent subsystems to detect
any one object, which also serves to simplify validation for each subsystem. A detailed description of the redundant
system approach is given in Section 5.2. Planning on the other hand, presents unique validation challenges. Driving
a vehicle is a multi-agent process and decisions should dependen on the actions and responses of others. This is why
when humans take a driving test, we do not do so on a closed track but rather in the real world because it is only there
that our multi-agent decision making capabilities can be sufficiently evaluated. In the next section we review existing
approaches for evaluating the safety of planning, and in Section 3 we describe our RSS model.

2 Existing Approaches to Claims on Safe AV Decision Making

Five approaches for evaluating the safety of AV are currently being promoted in the industry: miles driven, disengage-
ments, simulation, scenario based testing and proprietary approaches.
    The “Miles driven” approach is based on a statistical argument attempting to show that self-driving cars are sta-
tistically better than human drivers. This approach is problematic because of the sheer amount of miles that would
need to be driven to gain enough statistical evidence that a claimed probability of error (i.e. the chance of making an
unsafe driving decision) has been met. In the following technical lemma, we formally show why a statistical approach
to validation of an autonomous vehicles system is infeasible, even for validating a simple claim such as “on average,
the system makes an accident once in N hours”.
Lemma 1 Let X be a probability space, and A be an event for which Pr(A) = p1 < 0.1. Assume we sample m = 1
i.i.d. samples from X , and let Z = ∑m 1 p1
        i=1 [x∈A]. Then
        Pr(Z = 0) ≥ e−2.

Proof We use the inequality 1 − x ≥ e−2x (proven for completeness in Appendix A.1), to get

        Pr(Z = 0) = (1 − p1)m ≥ e−2p¹m = e−2.




Corollary 1 Assume an autonomous vehicle system AV1 makes an accident with small yet insufficient probability p1.
Any deterministic validation procedure which is given 1/p samples, will, with constant probability, not distinguish
        1
between AV1 and a different autonomous vehicle system AV0 which never makes accidents.
In order to gain perspective over the typical values for such probabilities, consider public accident statistics in the
United States. The probability of a fatal accident for a human driver in 1 hour of driving is 10−6. From the Lemma
above, if we want to claim that an AV meets the same probability of a fatal accident, one would need more than 106
hours of driving. Assuming that the average speed in 1 hour of driving is 30 miles per hour, the AV would need to
drive 30 million miles to have enough statistical evidence that the AV under test meets the same probability of a fatal
accident in 1 hour of driving as a human driver. However, this would only deliver an AV as good as a human, whereas
the promise of AVs is to deliver a level of safety above and beyond any human. Hence, if instead our target was to be
three orders of magnitude safer than a human, we have a new probability target of 10−9, which would then require us
to drive 30 Billion miles to have enough statistical evidence to argue that the probability of the AV making an unsafe
decision that will lead to a fatality per one hour of driving is −9. And then what if a single line of code has changed
        10
in the AV’s planning software? Now the testing must start all over again as it is impossible to know if that code change
has resulted in a new failure that was not present during the first 30 Billion mile drive.
    Further, there is the concern whether the miles driven are meaningful to begin with. One could easily create
“low value” driving experiences, such as accumulating miles on empty roads without other road users to challenge
   5Strictly speaking, the vehicle actions might change the distribution over the way we view the environment. However, this dependency can be
circumvented by data augmentation techniques.

        4

    Figure 1: The central car can do nothing to ensure absolute safety.


the driving policy of the system. While a certain amount of meaningful miles is warranted when performing on-road
testing (with the specific number and kind of miles to be defined together by government and industry), using a generic
miles driven argument to make safety claims on the decision making capabilities of an AV does not provide sufficient
assurance of whether an AV knows how to drive safely and so is thus worthy of a license to drive.
    Another metric frequently cited as proof of the safety of an AV’s decision making is known as a disengagement.
A disengagement is roughly defined as a situation where a human safety driver had to intervene in the operation of the
AV because it made an unsafe decision that was going to lead to an accident. The main rational of the disengagements
metric is that it counts for a more frequent statistical event: “almost an accident” rather than “an accident” or “an
accident leading to a fatality”. The problem, however, is twofold — first, like in the “mileage driven” approach there
is an issue with the distribution of “easy” versus “challenging” cases during testing. An AV that is tested in “easy”
environments with limited traffic could rack up mileage with zero disengagements yet will not be “safe” to drive in
real congested traffic. Second, the assumption about the relation between “almost an accident” and “an accident” is
likely to not hold for the difficult rare cases.
    Another approach to validate safety-claims of an AV is through simulation. The idea is to build a simulator with
a virtual world within which the AV’s software will be driven 10s of Billions of miles as a way to achieve the huge
“miles driven” targets that would be needed to make a statistical claim on the safety of the AV’s decision making
capabilities.
    The problem with this argument is that validating that the simulator faithfully represents reality is as hard as
validating the driving policy itself. To see why this is true, suppose that the simulator has been validated in the sense
that applying a driving policy π in the simulator leads to a probability of an accident of pˆ, and the probability of an
accident of π in the real world is p, with |p − pˆ| < . (Say that we need that will be smaller than 10−9.) Now we
replace the driving policy to be π′. Suppose that with probability of 10−8, π′ performs a weird action that confuses
human drivers and leads to an accident. It is possible (and even rather likely) that this weird action is not modeled in
the simulator, without contradicting its superb capabilities in estimating the performance of the original policy π. This
proves that even if a simulator has been shown to reflect reality for a driving policy π, it is not guaranteed to reflect
reality for another driving policy.
    Another active area of work that claims to provide assurance of an AV’s ability to make safe driving decisions is
scenario based verification. The basic idea is that if only we could enumerate all the possible driving scenarios that
could exist in the entire world then we could simply expose the AV (via simulation, closed track testing or on-road
testing) to all of those scenarios and as a result we can now be confident that the AV will only ever make safe driving
decisions.
    The challenge with scenario-based approaches has to do with the notion of “generalization”, in the sense of the
underlying assumption that if the AV passes the scenarios successfully then it is likely to pass other similar scenarios
as well. The danger, just as in machine learning, is “overfitting” the system to pass the test. Even if extra care is taken
not to overfit, the arguments of generalization are weak at best.





    5

3 The Responsibility-Sensitive Safety (RSS) model for Multi-agent Safety

The discussion above focused on the shortcomings of the existing approaches for validating the nominal safety of an
AV agent. Before we proceed, we should rule out what is clearly infeasible which is the naive statement that an AV,
sharing the road with human-driven cars, will never be involved in an accident — a statement we refer to as Utopia.
    We say an action a taken by a car c is absolutely safe if no accident can follow it at some future time. It is easy
to see that it is impossible to achieve absolute safety, by observing simple driving scenarios, for example, as depicted
in Figure 1: from the central car’s perspective, no action can ensure that none of the surrounding cars will crash into
it, and no action can help it escape this potentially dangerous situation. We emphasize that solving this problem by
forbidding the autonomous car from being in such situations is completely impossible — every highway with more
than 2 lanes will lead to it and forbidding this scenario amounts to staying in the parking lot.
    Instead we refer to the driving forces underlying human judgement when sharing the road with other road-users.
Traffic laws are well defined until one encounters the elusive directive, common in Tort law, called the Duty of Care.
    The Duty of Care states that an individual should exercise “reasonable care” while performing acts that could harm
others. What is meant in “being careful” is open for interpretation and must follow societal norms whose definitions
are fluid, change over time, and gradually get clarified through legal precedents over past accidents that went through
court proceedings for a resolution. A human driver must exercise care due to the uncertainty regarding the actions of
other road users. If the driver must take into account the extreme worst case about the actions of other road users then
driving becomes impossible. Hence, the human driver makes some “reasonable” assumptions about the worst case
scenarios of other road-users. We refer to the assumptions being made as an “interpretation” of the Duty of Care law.
    Responsibility-Sensitive-Safety (RSS) is a rigorous mathematical model formalizing an interpretation of the Duty
of Care law. RSS is designed to achieve three goals: first, the interpretation of the law should be sound in the sense
that it complies with how humans interpret the law. While we are at it we would like also to prove “AI-Utopia” —
meaning that if all agents follow RSS interpretation then there will be zero accidents. Second, the interpretation should
lead to a useful driving policy, meaning it will lead to an agile driving policy rather than an overly-defensive driving
which inevitably would confuse other human drivers and will block traffic and in turn limit the scalability of system
deployment; As an example of a valid, but not useful, interpretation is to assume that in order to be “careful” our
actions should not affect other road users. Meaning, if we want to change lane we should find a gap large enough such
that if other road users continue their own motion uninterrupted we could still squeeze-in without a collision. Clearly,
for most societies this interpretation is over-cautious and will lead the AV to block traffic and be non-useful.
    Third, the interpretation should be efficiently verifiable in the sense that we can rigorously prove that the self-
driving car implements correctly the interpretation of the law. The last property is not obvious at all because there could
be many interpretations which are not analytically verifiable because of “butterfly effects” where a seemingly innocent
action could lead to an accident of the agent’s fault in the longer future. One way to ensure efficient verification is to
design the interpretation to follow the inductive principle — a feature we designed into the RSS.
    By and large, RSS is constructed by formalizing the following 5 “common sense” rules:
   1. Do not hit someone from behind.
   2. Do not cut-in recklessly.
   3. Right-of-way is given, not taken.
   4. Be careful of areas with limited visibility
   5. If you can avoid an accident without causing another one, you must do it.
    The subsections below formalize those rules. We begin below with a simple scenario in order to get used to the
concept we will be developing in the remainder of the paper.

3.1 Gentle Start — Single Lane Road
We start with the simplest possible scenario: a single lane road, where cars cannot perform lateral manoeuvres. This
scenario will allow us to introduce some first, simplistic versions of key concepts such as safe distance, dangerous

        6

situation, proper response, and responsibility. It also enables us to showcase our technique for formally proving the
safety of a driving policy.
    When driving along a single lane road, the common sense rule is “if someone hits you from behind it is not your
fault”. So, a first try would be to define that if a rear car, cr, hits a front car, cf , from behind, then cr is responsbile for
the accident. But, this definition does not always comply with common sense. For example, suppose that both cr and
cf are driving slowly up a hill, and then cf slows down and starts rolling backward until it hits cr. Even though cr hit
cf from behind, the common sense in this situation is that cf should be responsible.
    We will get back to this issue in later subsections, so for the remainder of this subsection, we assume that cars
never drive backward. We turn to discuss the more interesting question of: “how can cr ensure that it will never hit
cf from behind”. Intuitively, it is the responsibility of cr to keep a “safe distance” from cf , and this “safe distance”
should be large enough so that no matter what, cr will not hit cf . In our simple case, the worst case situation is that
cf will suddenly brake hard, it will take cr some time to figure this out and to brake as well, and then both cars will
decelerate until reaching a full stop. A formalism of this concept is given below.
Definition 1 (Safe longitudinal distance — same direction) A longitudinal distance between a car cr that drives
behind another car cf , where both cars are driving at the same direction, is safe w.r.t. a response time ρ if for any
braking of at most amax,brake, performed by cf , if cr will accelerate by at most amax,accel during the response time,
and from there on will brake by at least amin,brake until a full stop then it won’t collide with cf .
Lemma 2 below calculates the safe distance as a function of the velocities of cr, cf and the parameters in the definition.
Lemma 2 Let cr be a vehicle which is behind cf on the longitudinal axis. Let ρ, amax,brake, amax,accel, amin,brake be
as in Definition 1. Let vr, vf be the longitudinal velocities of the cars. Then, the minimal safe longitudinal distance
between the front-most point of cr and the rear-most point of cf is:
        [ ]
        dmin = vr ρ + 21 amax,accel ρ2 + (vr + ρ amax,accel)2 − vf2 ,
        2amin,brake 2amax,brake +
where we use the notation [x]+ := max{x, 0}.
Proof Let d0 denote the initial distance between cr and cf . Denote vρ,max = vr + ρ amax,accel. The velocity of the
front car decreases with t at a rate amax,brake (until arriving to zero or that a collision happens), while the velocity of the
rear car increases in the time interval [0, ρ] (until reaching vρ,max) and then decreases at a rate amin,brake < amax,brake
until arriving to zero or to a collision. It follows that if at some point in time the two cars have the same velocity, then
from there on, the front car’s velocity will be smaller, and the distance between them will be monotonically decreasing
until both cars reach a full stop (where the “distance” can be negative if collision happens). From this it is easy to see
that the worst-case distance will happen either at time zero or when the two cars reach a full stop. In the former case
we should require d0 > 0. In the latter case, the distances the front and rear car will pass until a full stop is 2amax,brakevᶠ²
and vr ρ + 12 amax,accel ρ2 + 2avρ,² max . At that point, the distance between them should be larger than zero,
        min,brake
        d0 + 2amax,brakevf2 − (vr ρ + 12 amax,accel ρ2 + 2avρ,max2 ) > 0 .
        min,brake

Rearranging terms, we conclude our proof.

    Let us now get back to the question of “how can one make sure to never hit someone from behind”. The basic
idea is as follows. When the distance between a rear car, cr, and a front car, cf , is not safe, we say that the situation
is dangerous. Let tb be some time in which the situation becomes dangerous (that is, tb is a dangerous time but
immediately before tb the situation is not dangerous). We require cr to properly respond to the dangerous situation as
follows: in the time interval [tb, tb + ρ], cr can apply any acceleration as long as it doesn’t exceed amax,accel. After
that, and as long as the situation is still dangerous, cr must brake by at least amin,brake. In addition, if cr is at a full
stop and the situation is dangerous, it must not start driving.

        7

    We now claim that this proper response behavior guarantees that cr would never hit cf . The crux of the proof is an
inductive argument. We will prove that there is a sequence of increasing times, 0 = t0 ≤ t1 < t2 < t3 < . . ., such that
for every time ti, i ≥ 1, there is no collision in the time interval [ti−1, ti], and at time ti the situation is not dangerous.
The basis of the induction is the first time, t1, in which cr is starting to drive. By the definition of proper response, t1
is not a dangerous situation, and it is clear that cr did not hit someone from behind before it started to drive (recall that
for now we assume that no cars are driving backwards). Suppose the inductive assumption holds for t1 < . . . < ti. So,
at time ti, the situation is non-dangerous. Let tb be the earliest t after ti for which the situation becomes dangerous.
If no such tb exists, then there will be no accidents in the time interval [ti, ∞) (because, before an accident occurs,
the situation must be dangerous), hence we are done. Otherwise, let te be the earliest time after tb in which either the
situation becomes non-dangerous or cr arrives to a full stop. If at te the situation becomes non-dangerous, then we set
ti+1 = te. Otherwise, we set ti+1 to be the earliest time after te in which cr starts to drive again. In both cases, by
the definitions of proper response and safe distance, there will be no accident in the time interval [tb, te]. And, clearly,
there can be no accidents in the time intervals [ti, tb] and [te, ti+1]. Hence, our inductive argument is concluded.
Remark 1 (No contradictions and star-shape calculations) Our definition of proper response enables star-shape
calculations: we can consider the proper response of our car with respect to each other car individually, each proper
response implies a constraint on the maximal acceleration we are allowed to perform, and taking the minimum of
these constraints is guaranteed to satisfy all the constraints. Furthermore, the inductive proof technique relies on this
pairwise structure. It is important to emphasize that there is an intimate relationship between the specific choice of
definitions (of dangerous situation and proper response) and the ability to enable star-shape calculations and to make
the inductive argument. To illustrate this point, suppose we would slightly change the definition of proper response,
by also requiring the front car to accelerate a little bit when a rear car is approaching towards it fast from behind. In
this case, we might reach contradictions: on one hand we should accelerate because someone approaches fast from
behind, while on the other hand we need to brake because the car in front of us is braking. To resolve such contra-
dictions we will need to consider all the vehicles together, which is expensive from computational perspective, and
requires a different proof technique. Maintaining definitions which support efficient star-shape calculations and facil-
itate formal correctness in the full complexity of driving scenes (including lateral manoeuvres, junctions, pedestrians,
and occlusions) is a great challenge that we tackle in this paper.
Remark 2 (The parameters control the soundness/usefulness tradeoff) The definitions of safe longitudinal distance
and proper response depend on parameters: ρ, amax,accel, amin,brake, amax,brake. These parameters induce assump-
tions on the behavior of road agents—for example, the rear car assumes that the front car will not brake stronger than
amax,brake, even if physically the front car is capable of braking stronger than that. If the front car brakes stronger
than amax,brake, then the inductive proof breaks and there might be an accident. Since the rear car cannot know the
exact braking mechanism of the front car, it has no way of knowing the exact value of amax,brake. Setting it to a very
large value makes the model more sound (the number of cases in which the assumptions will not hold, and therefore
the model will not capture reality, will be much smaller). On the other hand, a very large value of amax,brake induces
an extremely defensive driving. In the extreme case, when amax,brake = ∞, the safe distance formula states that we
should refer to every car in front of us as if it stands still, which does not allow a normal flow of traffic.
    We therefore argue that these parameters should be determined to some reasonable values by regulation, as they
induce a set of allowed assumptions that a driver (robotic or human) can make on the behavior of other road users.
    Of course, the parameters can be set differently for a robotic car and a human driven car. For example, the response
time of a robotic car is usually smaller than that of a human driver and a robotic car can brake more effectively than
a typical human driver, hence amin,brake can set to be larger for a robotic car. They can also be set differently for
different road conditions (wet road, ice, snow).
Remark 3 (Utopia is possible) Our inductive proof shows that if a car responds properly to dangerous situations
then it will not hit another car from behind, as long as the front car will not brake stronger than amax,brake (and will
not drive backwards). This immediately implies that if all road users will adhere to the assumptions, and will respond
properly to dangerous situations, then utopia is possible, in the sense that there will be no accidents. This strengthens
the soundness of our definitions. While this claim is trivial for the simplistic case we are considering now, we will
later show that it holds even when considering a much more complicated world (which includes lateral manoeuvres,
different geometry, pedestrians, and occlusions).

        8

Figure 2: Changing lane width. Although the red car drives in parallel to the lane’s center (black arrow), it clearly
makes lateral movement towards the lane. The blue car, although getting further away from the lane’s center, stays in
the same position w.r.t. the lane boundary.


    Having described the main idea behind our technique, we now turn to the harder part of constructing adequate defi-
nitions for all type of roads. We start with formally defining the notions of longitudinal and lateral position/velocity/acceleration.

3.2 Preliminaries — A Lane-Based Coordinate System
In the previous subsection we have assumed that the road is straight. In the next subsections, we would want to keep
the simplicity of definitions by assuming that the road is comprised by straight lanes of constant width. In that case,
there is a clear meaning to the longitudinal and lateral axes, along with an ordering of longitudinal position. This
distinction plays a significant role in common-sense driving. However, real road are never perfectly straight. We
therefore propose a generic transformation from (global) positions on the plane, to a lane-based coordinate system,
reducing the problem yet again to the original, “straight lane of constant width”, case.
    Assume that the lane’s center is a smooth directed curve r on the plane, where all of its pieces, denoted r(1), . . . , r(k),
are either linear, or an arc. Note that smoothness of the curve implies that no pair of consecutive pieces can be linear.
Formally, the curve maps a “longitudinal” parameter, Y ∈ [Ymin, Ymax] ⊂ R, into the plane, namely, the curve is a
function of the form r : [Ymin, Ymax] → R2. We define a continuous lane-width function w : [Ymin, Ymax] → R+,
mapping the longitudinal position Y into a positive lane width value. For each Y , from smoothness of r, we can define
the normal unit-vector to the curve at position Y , denoted r⊥(Y ). We naturally define the subset of points on the plane
which reside in the lane as follows:

        R = {r(Y ) + αw(Y )r⊥(Y ) | Y ∈ [Ymin, Ymax], α ∈ [±1/2]} .

Informally, our goal is to construct a transformation φ of R into R2,6 such that for two cars which are on the lane, their
“logical ordering” will be preserved:
    • If cr is “behind” cf on the curve, then φ(cr)y < φ(cf )y.
    • If cl is “to the left of” cr on the curve, then φ(cl)x < φ(cr)x.
In order to define φ, we rely on the assumption that for all i, if r(i) is an arc of radius ρ, then the width of the lane
throughout r(i) is ≤ ρ/2. Note that this assumption holds for any practical road. The assumption trivially implies that
for all (x′, y′) ∈ R, there exists a unique pair Y ′ ∈ [Ymin, Ymax], α′ ∈ [±1/2], s.t. (x′, y′) = r(Y ′)+ α′w(Y ′)r⊥(Y ′).
We can now define φ : R → R2 to be φ(x′, y′) = (Y ′, α′), where (Y ′, α′) are the unique values that satisfy (x′, y′) =
r(Y ′) + α′w(Y ′)r⊥(Y ′).
   6Where, as in RSS, we will associate the y-axis with the “longitudinal” axis, and the x-axis with the “lateral”.


    9

    This definition captures the notion of a “lateral manoeuvre” in lane’s coordinate system. Consider, for example,
a widening lane, with a car driving exactly on one of the lane’s boundaries (see Figure 2 for an illustration). The
widening of the lane means that the car is moving away from the center of the lane, and therefore has lateral velocity
w.r.t. it. However, this doesn’t mean it performs a lateral manoeuvre. Our definition of φ(x′, y′)x = α′, namely, the
lateral distance to the lane’s center in w(Y ′)-units, implies that the lane boundaries have a fixed lateral position of
±1/2, hence, a car which sticks to one of the lane’s boundaries is not considered to perform any lateral movement.
Finally, it is easy to see that φ is a bijective embedding. We will use the term lane-based coordinate system when
discussing φ(R) = [Ymin, Ymax] × [±1/2].
    We have thus obtained a reduction from a general lane geometry to a straight, longitudinal/lateral, coordinate
system. The meaning of longitudinal/lateral position follows immediately and the meaning of longitudinal/lateral
velocity/acceleration follows by taking the first/second derivatives of the position. This will be the meaning of longi-
tudinal/lateral position/velocity/acceleration throughout the rest of the paper.

3.3 Longitudinal Safe Distance and Proper Response
The definition of a safe distance from Section 3.1 is sound for the case that both the rear and front cars are driving at
the same direction. Indeed, in this case, it is the responsibility of the rear car to keep a safe distance from the front car,
and to be ready for unexpected, yet reasonable, braking. However, when the two cars are driving at opposite directions,
we need to refine the definition. Consider for example a car cr that is currently at a safe distance from a preceding car,
cf , that stands still. Suddenly, cf is reversing very fast into a parking spot and cr hits it from behind. Depending on
the speed of cf ’s manoeuvre, the common sense here may be that the responsibility is not on the rear car, even though
it hits cf from behind. To formalize this common sense, we simply note that the definitions of “rear and front” do not
apply to scenarios in which vehicles are moving toward each other (namely, the signs of their longitudinal velocities
are opposite). In such cases we expect both cars to decrease the absolute value of their velocity in order to avoid a
crash.
    We could therefore define the safe distance between cars that drive in opposite directions to be the distance required
so as if both cars will brake (after a response time) then there will be no crash. However, it makes sense that the car
that drives at the opposite direction to the lane direction should brake harder than the one who drives at the correct
direction. This leads to the following definition.
Definition 2 (Safe longitudinal distance — opposite directions) Consider cars c1, c2 driving on a lane with longi-
tudinal velocities v1, v2, where v2 < 0 and v1 ≥ 0 (the sign of the longitudinal velocity is according to the allowed
direction of driving on the lane). The longitudinal distance between the cars is safe w.r.t. a response time ρ, braking
parameters amin,brake, amin,brake,correct, and an acceleration parameter amax,accel, if in case c1, c2 will increase the
absolute value of their velocities at rate amax,accel during the response time, and from there on will decrease the ab-
solute value of their velocities at rate amin,brake,correct, amin,brake, respectively, until a full stop, then there will not be
a collision.
A calculation of the safe distance for the case of opposite directions is given in the lemma below (whose proof is
straightforward, and hence omitted).
Lemma 3 Consider the notation given in Definition 2. Define v1,ρ = v1 + ρ amax,accel and v2,ρ = |v2| + ρ amax,accel.
Then, the minimal safe longitudinal distance between c1 and c2 is:
        dmin = v1 +2v1,ρ ρ + 2a v1,ρ2 + |v2| + v2,ρ ρ + v2,ρ2 .
        min,brake,correct 2 2amin,brake
    Before a collision between two cars, they first need to be at a non-safe distance. Intuitively, the idea of the safe
distance definitions is that if both cars will respond “properly” to violations of the safe distance then there cannot be a
collision. If one of them didn’t respond “properly” then it is responsible for the accident. To formalize this, it is first
important to know the moment in wich the cars start to be at a non-safe distance.
Definition 3 (Dangerous Longitudinal Situation and Danger Threshold) We say that time t is longitudinally dan-
gerous for cars c1, c2 if the distance between them at time t is non safe (according to Definition 1 or Definition 2).

        10

Given a longitudinally dangerous time t, its Longitudinal Danger Threshold, denoted tlongb , is the earliest longitudi-
nally dangerous time such that all the times in the interval [tlongb , t] are longitudinally dangerous. In particular, an
accident can only happen at time t if it is longitudinally dangerous, and in that case we say that the longitudinally
Danger Threshold of the accident is the longitudinally threshold time of t.
Next, we define what is a “longitudinal proper response” to longitudinal dangerous situations.
Definition 4 (Longitudinal Proper response) Let t be a longitudinally dangerous time for cars c1, c2 and let tlongb
be the corresponding longitudinally blame time. The longitudinally proper response of the two cars is to comply with
the following constraints on the longitudinal speed:
   1. If at the longitudinally Danger Threshold time, the two cars were driving at the same direction, and say that c1
      is the rear car, then:
        • c1’s acceleration must be at most amax,accel during the interval [tlongb , tlongb + ρ) and at most −amin,brake
        from time tlongb + ρ until reaching a safe longitudinal situation. After that, any non-positive acceleration
        is allowed.
        • c2 acceleration must be at least −amax,brake until reaching a safe longitudinal situation. After that, any
        non-negative acceleration is allowed.
   2. If at the longitudinally Danger Threshold time the two cars were driving at opposite directions, and say that c2
      was driving at the wrong direction (negative velocity), then:
        • c1 acceleration must be at most amax,accel during the interval [tlongb , tlongb +ρ) and at most −amin,brake,correct
        from time tlongb + ρ until reaching a full stop. After that, it can apply any non-positive acceleration
        • c2 acceleration must be at least −amax,accel during the interval [tlongb , tlongb + ρ) and at least amin,brake
        from time tlongb + ρ until reaching a full stop. After that, any non-negative acceleration is allowed.

3.4 Lateral Safe Distance and Proper Response
Unlike longitudinal velocity, which can be kept to a value of 0 for a long time (the car is simply not moving), keeping
lateral velocity at exactly 0 is impossible as cars usually perform small lateral fluctuations. It is therefore required to
introduce a robust notion of lateral velocity.
Definition 5 (μ-lateral-velocity) Consider a point located at a lateral location l at time t. Its μ-lateral velocity at
time t is defined as follows. Let tout > t be the earliest future time in which the point’s lateral position, denoted lout,
is either l − μ/2 or l + μ/2 (if no such time exists we set tout = ∞). If at some time t′ ∈ (t, tout) the point’s lateral
position is l, then the μ-lateral-velocity is 0. Otherwise, the μ-lateral-velocity is (lout − l)/(tout − t).
    Roughly speaking, in order to have a collision between two vehicles, it is required that they will be close both
longitudinally and laterally. For the longitudinal axis, we have already formalized the notion of “being close” using
the safe distance. We will now do the same for lateral distance.
Definition 6 (Safe Lateral Distance) The lateral distance between cars c1, c2 driving with lateral velocities v1, v2
    is safe w.r.t. parameters ρ, alat , alat            , μ, if during the time interval [0, ρ] the two cars will apply lateral
                                 min,brake max,accel
    acceleration of alat     toward each other, and after that the two cars will apply lateral braking of alat          , until
               max,accel                                                        min,brake
    they reach zero lateral velocity, then the final lateral distance between them will be at least μ.
    A calculation of the lateral safe distance is given in the lemma below (whose proof is straightforward, and hence
    omitted).
    Lemma 4 Consider the notation given in Definition 6. W.l.o.g. assume that c1 is to the left of c2. Define v1,ρ            =
    v1 + ρ alat  and v
    max,accel        2,ρ         = v2 − ρ alat          . Then, the minimal safe lateral distance between the right side of c
    and the left part of c2 is:      [     max,accel                   (        )]                                            1
                     dmin = μ +      v1 +2v1,ρ ρ + 2alatv12,ρ        −     v2 +2v2,ρ ρ − 2alatv2,ρ2   .
                                                        min,brake           min,brake     +

                                                            11

    The following definitions are the analogue of Definition 3 and Definition 8 for the lateral case.
Definition 7 (Dangerous Lateral Situation and Danger Threshold time) We say that time t is laterally dangerous
for cars c1, c2 if the lateral distance between them at time t is non safe (according to Definition 6). Given a laterally
dangerous time t, its Lateral Danger Threshold time, denoted tlatb , is the earliest laterally dangerous time such that all
the times in the interval [tlatb , t] are laterally dangerous. In particular, an accident can only happen at time t if it is
laterally dangerous, and in that case we say that the laterally threshold time of the accident is the laterally Danger
Threshold time of t.

Definition 8 (Lateral Proper response) Let t be a laterally dangerous time for cars c1, c2, let tlatb be the correspond-
ing laterally Danger Threshold time, and w.l.o.g. assume that at that time c1 was to the left of c2. The laterally proper
response of the two cars is to comply with the following constraints on the lateral speed:
    • If t ∈ [tlatb , tlatb + ρ) then both cars can do any lateral action as long as their lateral acceleration, a, satisfies
     |a| ≤ alat             .
     max,accel
     • Else, if t ≥ tlatb   + ρ:
     – Before reaching μ-lateral-velocity of 0, c1 must apply lateral acceleration of at most −alat and c
                                min,brake                                                                                     2
     must apply lateral acceleration of at least alat
                                min,brake
                  – After reaching μ-lateral-velocity of 0, c1 can have any non-positive μ-lateral-velocity and c2 can have any
     non-negative μ-lateral-velocity

    Remark 4 For simplicity, we assumed that cars can immediately switch from applying a “lateral braking” of alat
    to being at a μ-lateral-velocity of        min,brake
                                           0. This might not always be possible due to physical properties of the car. But, the
    important factor in the definition of proper response is that from time tb + ρ to the time the car reaches a μ-lateral-
    velocity of 0, the total lateral distance it will pass will not be larger than the one it would have passed had it applied
    a braking of alat       until a full stop. Achieving this goal by a real vehicle is possible by first braking at a stronger
         min,brake
    rate and then decreasing lateral speed more gradually at the end. It is easy to see that this change will have no effect
    on the essence of RSS (as well as on the procedure for efficiently guaranteeing RSS safety that will be described in the
    next section).

    Remark 5 The definitions hold for vehicles of arbitrary shapes, by taking the worst-case with respect to all points of
    each car. In particular, this covers semi-trailers or a car with an open door.

3.5 Combining Longitudinal and Lateral Proper Responses
We next combine the longitudinal and lateral proper responses into a single proper response. We start with the case
of a multi-lane road (typical highway situations or rural roads), where all lanes share the same geometry. In this case
we can refer to all lanes as a single wide lane and the meaning of longitudinal and lateral position is well defined.
Cases of multiple geometries (merges, junctions, roundabouts, etc.), and unstructured roads, are discussed in the next
subsection, where we introduce the concept of priority.
    In order to have a collision between two cars, they must be both at a non-safe longitudinal distance and at a non-safe
lateral distance.
Definition 9 (Dangerous Situation and Danger Threshold time) We say that time t is dangerous for cars c1, c2 if
it is both longitudinally and laterally dangerous (according to Definition 3 and Definition 7). Given a dangerous
time t, its Danger Threshold time, denoted tb, is max{tlongb , tlatb }, where tlongb , tlatb are the longitudinal/lateral Danger
Threshold time, respectively. In particular, an accident can only happen at time t if it is dangerous, and in that case
we say that the Danger Threshold time of the accident is t.
When two cars are driving side-by-side, they are already at a non-safe longitudinal distance. If the situation becomes
dangerous, it means that they are getting closer laterally, and the lateral situation becomes dangerous as well. That is,
tb = tlatb . In this case, it makes sense that the proper response is to apply the proper response with respect to laterally

                                12

dangerous situations. Similarly, if cars are driving one behind the other, they are already at a non-safe lateral distance.
If the situation becomes dangerous, it means that they are getting closer longitudinal, and the longitudinal situation
becomes dangerous as well. That is, tb = tlongb . In this case, it makes sense that the proper response is to apply the
proper response with respect to longitudinal dangerous situations. This is captured in the following definition.
Definition 10 (Basic Proper response to dangerous situations) Let t be a dangerous time for cars c1, c2 and let
tb, tlongb , tlatb be the corresponding Danger Threshold time, longitudinal Danger Threshold time, and lateral Danger
Threshold time, respectively. The basic proper response of the two cars is to comply with the following constraints on
the lateral/longitudinal speed:
   1. If tb = tlongb then the longitudinal speed is constrained according to Definition 4.
   2. If tb = tlatb then the lateral speed is constrained according to Definition 8.
    Figure 3 illustrates the definition.
    To strengthen the soundness of the above definition, the lemma below shows that if all cars will respond properly
then there will be no accidents.
Lemma 5 Consider a multi-lane road where all lanes share the same geometry. Suppose that at all times, all cars on
the road comply with the basic proper response as given in Definition 10. Then, there will be no collisions.
Proof The definitions have been carefully crafted so that a similar inductive argument to the one given in Section 3.1
would hold. We will prove that for any pair of cars, c1, c2, there is a sequence of increasing times, 0 = t0 ≤ t1 <
t2 < t3 < . . ., such that for every time ti, i ≥ 1, there is no collision between c1 and c2 in the time interval [ti−1, ti],
and at time ti the situation between c1 and c2 is not dangerous. The basis of the induction is the earliest time, t1, in
which one of the cars is starting to drive. By the definition of proper response, t1 is not a dangerous situation, and it is
clear that there cannot be an accident from t0 to t1. Suppose the inductive assumption holds for t1 < . . . < ti. So, at
time ti, the situation is non-dangerous. Let tb be the earliest time after ti for which the situation becomes dangerous.
If no such tb exists, then there will be no accidents in the time interval [ti, ∞) (because, before an accident occurs,
the situation must be dangerous), hence we are done. Otherwise, the definition of proper response implies that if both
agents apply the proper response then there is a time te ≥ tb for which either the situation becomes non-dangerous,
or the relative longitudinal velocity of the two cars is non-positive, or the relative lateral velocity of the two cars is
non-positive. In the former case, we set ti+1 = te. In the latter cases, we set ti+1 to be the earliest time after te in
which the cars are again not at a dangerous situation, and if no such time exists it must mean that the cars would never
collide in the time interval [te, ∞). In all cases, by the definitions of proper response and safe distance, there will be no
accident in the time interval [tb, te]. And, clearly, there can be no accidents in the time intervals [ti, tb] and [te, ti+1].
Hence, our inductive argument is concluded. Finally, it is crucial to note that the definitions of proper response imply
no contradictions between the proper response of c1 relatively to ci and relatively to cj , for any other two cars ci, cj .




3.6 Compensating for improper behavior of others
In the previous subsection we have shown that if all cars respond properly, according to the definition of basic proper
response, then there will be no collisions. But, it may be the case that some agent does not respond properly, yet the
other agent can prevent an accident. In such a case, it is reasonable to require that agents will do their “best effort” in
order to avoid dangerous situations. On the other hand, we do not want that an attempt to avoid one accident would
lead to another accident and we do not want that a requirement to avoid all accidents will severely harm the usefulness
of the model (e.g., if the implication would be to always be at an extremely low speed).
    We tackle the tradeoff by introducing another layer of protection as follows. Suppose we are already at a dangerous
situation with respect to some other agent and we figure out that if the other agent will keep its current behavior while
we will keep applying proper response, there will be a collision. For example, consider the top row of Figure 3, where
we are the yellow car. Our basic proper response is to not move laterally toward the red car and the red car’s proper


    13

    Before    Danger Threshold time  Proper Response










Figure 3: This figure illustrates the basic proper response as in Definition 10. The vertical lines around each car show the possible
lateral position of the car if it will accelerate laterally during the response time and then will brake laterally. Similarly, the rectangles
show the possible longitudinal positions of the car (it it’ll either brake by amax,brake or will accelerate during the response time and
then will brake by amin,brake). In the top two rows, before the Danger Threshold time there was a safe lateral distance, hence the
proper response is to brake laterally. The yellow car is already at μ-lateral-velocity of zero, hence only the red car brakes laterally.
Third row: before the Danger Threshold time there was a safe longitudinal distance, hence the proper response is for the car behind
to brake longitudinally. Fourth row: before the Danger Threshold time there was a safe longitudinal distance, in an oncoming
scenario, hence both car should brake longitudinally.
        14

response is to stop its lateral movement toward us. Suppose the red car does not stop its lateral manoeuvre. To avoid
a collision we can either brake longitudinally or move laterally to the left (or both). Any action for which there will
be no collision, assuming the red car will keep its current behavior, is a fine evasive manoeuvre. Furthermore, even
if a collision is not going to happen, we still don’t want to be at a dangerous situation for a long time. Therefore, we
should plan an action that will take us back to a non-dangerous situation.
    To make this formal we need some additional definitions.
Definition 11 (Naive Prediction) The longitudinal or lateral state of a road agent is defined by its position, velocity,
and acceleration, denoted by p0, v0, a0. The future state, assuming a naive prediction, is as follows. Let τ = −v0/a0
in case the signs of v0 and a0 are opposite, or τ = ∞ otherwise. The acceleration at time t is a0 if t ∈ [0, τ ] and 0
otherwise. The velocity at time t is v0 plus the integral of the velocity, and the position is p0 plus the integral of the
velocity.

Definition 12 (Evasive Manoeuvre) Suppose that at time t the situation is dangerous with respect to two road agents
        0
c1, c2. An evasive manoeuvre for c1, with respect to a plan time parameter T , is a set of two functions mlong : [t0, t1] →
R and mlat : [t0, t1] → R, where t1 = t0 + T , such that:
    • For t ∈ [t0, t1], the longitudinal and lateral positions of c1 is given by mlong(t) and mlat(t). As a result, the
      longitudinal/lateral velocities/accelerations of c1 are given by the first/second derivatives of the above.
    • Assume that during the time interval [t0, t1], c2 will drive according to its naive prediction (as given in Defi-
      nition 11) and c1 will drive according to mlong(t) and mlat(t), then the two cars will not collide in the time
      interval [t0, t1] and t1 will no longer be dangerous time.
We say that the evasive manoeuvre is legal if in addition to the above, it holds that:
    • The longitudinal and lateral accelerations of c1 at time t satisfy the basic proper response constraints of c1 (as
        0
      given in Definition 10) with respect to all other agents.
    • The absolute value of the lateral acceleration according to mlat is always at most alat and the longitudinal
        max,accel
      acceleration according to mlong is always in the interval [−amax,brake, amax,accel].

    We now extend Definition 10 to include the common sense rule of “if you can avoid an accident without causing
another accident, you must do it”.
Definition 13 (Proper Response with Extra Evasive Effort) Let t be a dangerous time for cars c1, c2 and let tb be
the corresponding blame time. Assume that during the time interval [tb, t], car c2 did not comply with the proper
response constraints as given in Definition 10. Assume also that there exists a legal evasive manoeuvre for c1 as
defined in Definition 12. Then, the proper response of c1 is to apply a legal evasive manoeuvre (in addition to the
proper response constraints as given in Definition 10).
    By requiring that the evasive manoeuvres would never contradict those of Definition 10, we make sure that they
would not cause another accident. Clearly, the proof of Lemma 5 still holds even if cars apply proper response as in
Definition 13.

3.7 Multiple Geometry and Right-of-Way Rules
We next turn to deal with scenarios in which there are multiple different road geometries in one scene that overlap in
a certain area. Examples include roundabouts, junctions, and merge into highways. See Figure 4 for illustration. In
many such cases, one route has priority over others, and vehicles riding on it have the right of way.
    In the previous subsections we could assume that the route is straight, by relying on Section 3.2 that shows how
to construct a bijection between a general lane geometry and a straight road, with a coherent meaning for longitudinal
and lateral axes. When facing scenarios of multiple route geometries, the definitions should be adjusted. First, two
routes with different geometries can yield conflicts in the constraints of the proper response. An example is given in
Figure 5.

        15

    (a)    (b)    (c)    (d)

    Figure 4: Different examples for multiple routes scenarios. In yellow, the prioritized route. In red, the secondary route.










    Different geometry    Same geometry










Figure 5: A proper response conflict due to multiple geometry. Right: if all routes share the same geometry, there
are no conflicts between the proper response constraints with regard to different cars. Left: the proper response of the
blue car with respect to the yellow car and yellow route is to continue straight according to the yellow route, while the
proper response of the blue car with respect to the red car and the red route is to continue driving on the center of the
red route. These two constraints contradict each other.








    16

    Moreover, consider the T-junction depicted on Figure 4b, and suppose that there is a stop sign for the red route.
Suppose that c1 is approaching the intersection on the yellow route and at the same time c2 is approaching the in-
tersection on the red route. According to the yellow route’s coordinate system, c2 has a very large lateral velocity,
hence c1 might deduce that c2 is already at a non-safe lateral distance, which implies that c1, driving on the prioritized
route, must reduce speed in order to maintain a safe longitudinal distance to c2. This means that c2 should be very
conservative w.r.t. traffic that coming from the red route. This is of course an unnatural behavior, as cars on the yellow
route have the right-of-way in this case. Furthermore, even c2, who doesn’t have the priority, should be able to merge
into the junction as long as c1 can stop in time (this will be crucial in dense traffic). This example shows that when c1
drives on r1, it doesn’t make sense to consider its position and velocity w.r.t the coordinate system of r2. As a result,
we need to generalize basic notions from previous subsections such as “what does it mean that c1 is in front of c2”,
and what does it mean to be at a non safe distance.

Remark 6 The definitions below assume that two cars, c1, c2 are driving on different routes, r1, r2. We emphasize
that in some situations (for example, the T-junction given in Figure 4b), once there is exactly a single route r1 such
that both cars are assigned to it, and the time is not dangerous, then from that moment on, the definitions are solely
w.r.t. r1.

    We start with generalizing the definition of safe lateral distance and lateral proper response. It is not hard to
verify that applying the definition below to two routes of the same geometry indeed yields the same definition as in
Definition 6. Throughout this section, we sometimes refer to a route as a subset of R2.
Definition 14 (Lateral Safe Distance for Two Routes of Different Geometry) Consider vehicles c1, c2 driving on
routes r1, r2 that intersect. For every i ∈ {1, 2}, let [xi,min, xi,max] be the minimal and maximal lateral positions in ri
    that ci can be in, if during the time interval [0, ρ) it will apply a lateral acceleration (w.r.t. ri) s.t. |alat| ≤ alat                  ,
                                                                                                max,accel
    and after that it will apply a lateral braking of at least alat                             (again w.r.t. r ), until reaching a zero lateral
                                                                                            min,brake        i
velocity (w.r.t. ri). The lateral distance between c1 and c2 is safe if the restrictions7 of r1, r2 to the lateral intervals
[x1,min, x1,max], [x2,min, x2,max] are at a distance8 of at least μ.
    The definition of laterally dangerous time and Danger Threshold time is exactly as in Definition 7, except that safe
lateral distance is according to Definition 14. We next define lateral proper response.

    Definition 15 (Lateral Proper response for Two Routes of Different Geometry)                Let t be a laterally dangerous time
    for cars c1, c2, driving on routes r1, r2, let tlatb                    be the corresponding laterally Danger Threshold time, and let x1, x2
    be the lateral positions of c1, c2 at time tlatb           w.r.t. routes r     , r       respectively. The        proper response of the two
                                                                               1            2,        laterally
cars is to comply with the following constraints on the lateral speed:
    • If t ∈ [tlatb , tlatb + ρ) then both cars can do any lateral action as long as their lateral acceleration, a, satisfies
                             |a| ≤ alat             .
                             max,accel
                             • Else, if t ≥ tlatb   + ρ, for every i ∈ {1, 2}:
                                 – Before reaching μ-lateral-velocity of 0, ci must apply lateral acceleration that will take it toward xi whose
                             magnitude value is at least |alat     |
                                                                                   min,brake
                                  – After reaching μ-lateral-velocity of 0, ci can have any lateral acceleration that will take it away from the
                             other car

    Before we define longitudinal safe distance, we need to quantify ordering between cars when no common longitu-
dinal axis exists.
Definition 16 (Longitudinal Ordering for Two Routes of Different Geometry) Consider c1, c2 driving on routes
r1, r2 that intersect. We say that c1 is longitudinally in front of c2 if either of the following holds:
   7The restriction of ri to the lateral intervals [xi,min, xi,max] is the subset of R2 obtained by all points (x, y) ∈ ri for which the lateral position
    in lane coordinates of8                         (x, y) (as defined in Section 3.2) is in the interval [xi,min, xi,max].
                             The distance between sets A, B is min {‖a − b‖ : a ∈ A, b ∈ B}.

                                                                               17

    Yellow is in front    Yellow is in front










    Yellow is in front    Nobody is in front










    Figure 6: Illustration of Definition 16.

   1. For every i, if both vehicles are on ri then c1 is in front of c2 according to ri
   2. c1 is outside r2 and c2 is outside r1, and the longitudinal distance from c1 to the set r1 ∩ r2, w.r.t. r1, is smaller
      than the longitudinal distance from c2 to the set r1 ∩ r2, w.r.t. r2.
Remark 7 One may worry that the longitudinal ordering definition is not robust, for example, in item (2) of the
definition, suppose that c1, c2 are at distances of 20, 20.1 meters, respectively, from the intersection. This is not
an issue as this definition is effectively being used only when there is a safe longitudinal distance between the two
cars, and in that case the ordering between the cars will be obvious. Furthermore, this is exactly analogous to the
non-robustness of ordering when two cars are driving side by side on a multi-lane highway road.
An illustration of the ordering definition is given in Figure 6.
Definition 17 (Longitudinal Safe Distance for Two Routes of Different Geometry) Consider c1, c2 driving on routes
r1, r2 that intersect. The longitudinal distance between c1 and c2 is safe if one of the following holds:
   1. If for all i ∈ {1, 2} s.t. ri has no priority, if ci will accelerate by amax,accel for ρ seconds, and will then brake
      by amin,brake until reaching zero longitudinal velocity (all w.r.t. ri), then during this time ci will remain outside
      of the other route.
   2. Otherwise, if c1 is in front of c2 (according to Definition 16), then they are at a safe longitudinal distance if
      in case c1 will brake by amax,brake until reaching a zero velocity (w.r.t. r1), and c2 will accelerate by at most
      amax,accel for ρ seconds and then will brake by at least amin,brake (w.r.t. r2) until reaching a zero velocity, then
      c1 will remain in front of c2 (according to Definition 16).
   3. Otherwise, consider a point p ∈ r1 ∩ r2 s.t. for i ∈ {1,2}, the lateral position of p w.r.t. ri is in [xi,min, xi,max]
      (as defined in Definition 14). Let [ti,min, ti,max] be all times s.t. ci can arrive to the longitudinal position of
      p w.r.t. ri if it will apply longitudinal accelerations in the range [−amax,brake, amax,accel] during the first ρ
      seconds, and then will apply longitudinal braking in the range [amin,brake, amax,brake] until reaching a zero
      velocity. Then, the vehicles are at a safe longitudinal distance if for every such p we have that [t1,min, t1,max]
      does not intersect [t2,min, t2,max].

    18

    STOP



     (a) Safe because yellow has priority   (b) Safe because yellow is in front of   (c) If yellow is at a full stop and red
     and red can stop before entering the   red, and if yellow will brake, red can   is at a full lateral stop, safe by item
     intersection.                          brake as well and avoid a collision.     (3) of Definition 17.

          Figure 7: Illustration of safe longitudinal distance (Definition 17)

    Illustrations of the definition is given in Figure 7.
             The definition of longitudinally dangerous time and Danger Threshold time is exactly as in Definition 3, except
    that safe longitudinal distance is according to Definition 17.

Definition 18 (Longitudinal Proper Response for Routes of Different Geometry) Suppose that time t is longitudi-
nally dangerous for vehicles c1, c2 driving on routes r1, r2 The longitudinal proper response depends on the situation
immediately before the Danger Threshold time:
    • If the longitudinal distance was safe according to item (1) in Definition 17, then if a vehicle is on the prioritized
      route it can drive normally, and otherwise it must brake by at least amin,brake if t − tb ≥ ρ.
    • Else, if the longitudinal distance was safe according to item (2) in Definition 17, then c1 can drive normally and
      c2 must brake by at least amin,brake if t − tb ≥ ρ.
    • Else, if the longitudinal distance was safe according to item (3) in Definition 17, then both cars can drive nor-
      mally if t−tb < ρ, and otherwise, both cars should brake laterally and longitudinally by at least alat , a
      (each one w.r.t. its own route).                                                   min,brake     min,brake

     Finally, the analogues of Definition 10, Definition 9, and Definition 13 are straightforward.

    Remark 8 (No contradictions and star-shape calculations Revisited)          The updated definition of proper response is
    with respect to a pair of cars riding on a pair of routes. As before, we need to consider the proper response of our car
    with respect to each other car individually. That is, here again we adopt a star-shape calculation. Since the proper
    response with respect to every other car is translated to a lateral and longitudinal braking constraints with respect
    to our route, there can be no conflicts between proper responses with respect to different agents. For example, in the
    situation depicted on the left of Figure 5, the proper response with respect to the red car is a longitudinal brake, and
    hence it does not contradict the proper response of lateral brake with respect to the yellow car. As a result, it is easy
    to verify that our inductive proof sill holds. Finally, note that there are cases where the route used by another agent is
    unknown: for example, see Figure 8. In such case, every agent should comply with the proper response obtained by
    checking all possibilities.


3.7.1 Traffic Lights
We next discuss intersections with traffic lights. One might think that the simple rule for traffic lights scenarios is “if
one car’s route has the green light and the other car’s route has a red light, then the blame is on the one whose route has
the red light”. However, this is not the correct rule. Consider for example the scenario depicted in Figure 9. Even if
the yellow car’s route has a green light, we do not expect it to ignore the red car that is already in the intersection. The

        19

Figure 8: The yellow car cannot know for sure what is the route of the red one.










Figure 9: “Right of way is given, not taken”: The red car’s route has a red light and it is stuck in the intersection. Even
though the yellow car’s route has a green light, since it has enough distance, it should brake so as to avoid an accident.








20

        TA OTE
        5
        Sea

        oe
        (a) (b)

        Figure 10: Unstructured roads. (a) a wide roundabout around arc-de-triomphe. (b) a parking lot.

correct rule is that the route that has a green light have a priority over routes that have a red light. Therefore, we obtain
a clear reduction from traffic lights to the route priority concept we have described previously. The above discussion
is a formalism of the common sense rule of right of way is given, not taken.

3.7.2 Unstructured Road
We next turn to consideration of unstructured roads, for example, see Figure 10. Consider first the scenario given in
Figure 10a. Here, while the partition of the road area to lanes is not well defined, the partition of the road to multiple
routes (with a clear geometry for every route) is well defined. Since our definitions of proper response only depend on
the route geometry, they apply as is to such scenarios.
    Next, consider the scenario where there is no route geometry at all (e.g. the parking lot given in Figure 10b).
Unlike the structured case, in which we separated the lateral and longitudinal directions, here we need two dimensional
trajectories.
Definition 19 (Trajectories) Consider a vehicle c riding on some road. A future trajectory of c is a function τ :
R+ → R2, where τ (t) is the position of c in t seconds from the current time. The tangent vector to the trajectory at t,
denoted τ ′(t), is the Jacobian of τ at t. We denote ts(τ ) = sup{t : ∀t1 ∈ [0, t), ‖τ ′(t1)‖ > 0}, namely, ts is the first
time in which the vehicle will arrive to a full stop, where if no such t exists we set ts(τ ) = ∞.
    Dangerous situations will depend on the possibility of a collision between two trajectories. This is formalized
below.
Definition 20 (Trajectory Collision) Let τ1, τ2 be two future trajectories of c1, c2, with corresponding stopping times
t1 = ts(τ1), t2 = ts(τ2). Given parameters , θ, we say that τ1 and τ2 do not collide, and denote it by τ1 ∩ τ2 = ∅, if
either of the following holds:
   1. For every t ∈ [0, max(t1, t2)] we have that ‖τ1(t) − τ2(t)‖ > .
   2. For every t ∈ [0, t1] we have that ‖τ1(t) − τ2(t)‖ > and the absolute value of the angle between the vectors
      (τ2(t1) − τ1(t1)) and τ2′ (t1) is at most θ.
Given a set of trajectories for c1, denoted T1, and a set of trajectories for c2, denoted T2, we say that T1 ∩ T2 = ∅ if
for every (τ1, τ2) ∈ T1 × T2 we have that τ1 ∩ τ2 = ∅.
The first item states that both vehicles will be away from each other until they are both at a full stop. The second item
states that the vehicles will be away from each other until the first one is at a full stop, and at that time, the velocity
vector of the second one points away from the first vehicle.
    Note that the collision operator we have defined is not commutative — think about two cars currently driving on
a very large circle at the same direction, where c1 is closely behind c2, and consider τ1 to be the trajectory in which
c1 brakes strongly and τ2 is the trajectory in which c2 continues at the same speed forever. Then, τ1 ∩ τ2 = ∅ while
τ2 ∩ τ1 = ∅.
    We continue with a generic approach, that relies on abstract notions of “braking” and “continue forward” behav-
iors. In the structured case the meanings of these behaviors were defined based on allowed intervals for lateral and
longitudinal accelerations. We will later specify the meanings of these behaviors in the unstructured case, but for now
we proceed with the definitions while relying on the abstract notions.

        21

Definition 21 (Possible Trajectories due to Braking and Normal Driving) Consider a vehicle c riding on some road.
Given a set of constraints, C, on the behavior of the car, we denote by T (C, c) the set 9 of possible future trajectories
of c if it will comply with the constraints given in C. Of particular interest are T (Cb, c), T (Cf , c) representing the
future trajectories due to constraints on braking behavior and constraints on continue forward behavior.
    We can now refine the notions of safe distance, dangerous situation, Danger Threshold time, proper response, and
responsibility.
Definition 22 (Safe Distance, Dangerous Situation, Danger Threshold time, and Proper Response, in Unstructured Roads)
The distance between c0, c1 driving on an unstructured road is safe if either of the following holds:
   1. For some i ∈ {0, 1} we have T (Cb, ci) ∩ T (Cf , c1−i) = ∅ and T (Cb, c1−i) ∩ T (Cf , ci) = ∅
   2. T (Cb, c0) ∩ T (Cb, c1) = ∅
We say that time t is dangerous w.r.t. c0, c1 if the distance between them is non safe. The corresponding Danger
Threshold time is the earliest dangerous time tb s.t. during the entire time interval [tb, t] the situation was dangerous.
The proper response of car cj at a dangerous time t with corresponding Danger Threshold time tb is as follows:
    • If both cars were already at a full stop, then cj can drive away from c1−j (meaning that the absolute value of
      the angle between its velocity vector and the vector of the difference between cj and c1−j should be at most θ,
      where θ is as in Definition 20)
    • Else, if tb was safe due to item (1) above and j = 1 − i, then cj should comply with the constraints of “continue
      forward” behavior, as in Cf , as long as c1−j is not at a full stop, and after that it should behave as in the case
      that both cars are at a full stop.
    • Otherwise, the proper response is to brake, namely, to comply with the constraints Cb.
    Finally, to make this generic approach concrete, we need to specify the braking constraints, Cb, and the con-
tinue forward behavior constraints, Cf . Recall that there are two main things that a clear structure gives us. Firstly,
vehicles can predict what other vehicles will do (other vehicles are supposed to drive on their route, and change lat-
eral/longitudinal speed at a bounded rate). Secondly, when a vehicle is at a dangerous time, the proper response is
defined w.r.t. the geometry of the route (“brake” laterally and longitudinally). It is very important that the proper re-
sponse is not defined w.r.t. the other vehicle from which we are at a non-safe distance, because had this been the case,
we could have conflicts when a vehicle were at a non-safe distance w.r.t. more than a single other vehicle. Therefore,
when designing the definitions for unstructured scenarios, we must make sure that the aforementioned two properties
will still hold.
    The approach we take relies on a basic kinematic model of vehicles. For the speed, we take the same approach as
we have taken for longitudinal velocity (bounding the range of allowed accelerations). For lateral movements, observe
that when a vehicle maintains a constant angle of the steering wheel and a constant speed, it will move (approximately)
on a circle. In other words, the heading angle of the car will change at a constant rate, which is called the yaw rate
of the car. We denote the speed of the car by v(t), the heading angle by h(t), and the yaw rate by h′(t) (as it is
the derivative of the heading angle). When h′(t) and v(t) are constants, the car moves on a circle whose “radius” is
v(t)/h′(t) (where the sign of the “radius” determines clockwise or counter clockwise and the “radius” is ∞ if the car
moves on a line, i.e. h′(t) = 0). We therefore denote r(t) = v(t)/h′(t). We will make two constraints on normal
driving. The first is that the inverse of the radius changes at a bounded rate The second is that h′(t) is bounded as
well. The expected braking behavior would be to change h′(t) and 1/r(t) in a bounded manner during the response
time, and from there on continue to drive on a circle (or at least be at a distance of at most /2 from the circle). This
    behavior forms the analogue of accelerating by at most alat         during the response time and then decelerating until
    reaching a lateral velocity of zero.    max,accel
    To make efficient calculations of the safe distance, we construct the superset T (Cb, c) as follows. W.l.o.g., lets call
    the Danger Threshold time to be t = 0, and assume that at the Danger Threshold time the heading of c is zero. By
    9A superset is also allowed. We will use supersets when it makes the calculation of the collision operator more easy.


    22

Figure 11: Illustration of the lateral behavior in unstructured scenes. The black line is the current trajectory. The blue
and red lines are the extreme arcs.

the constraint of |h′(t)| ≤ h′max we know that |h(ρ)| ≤ ρ h′max. In addition, the inverse of the radius at time ρ must
satisfy 1 1
        max r(ρ) r(0) max
        r(0) − ρ r−1′ ≤ ≤ 1 + ρ r−1′ , (1)
where r(0) = v(0)/h′(0). All in all, we define the superset T (Cb, c) to be all trajectories such that the initial heading
(at time 0) is in the range [−ρ h′max, ρ h′max], the trajectory is always on a circle whose inverse radius is according to (1),
and the longitudinal velocity on the circle is as in the structured case. For the continue forward trajectories, we perform
the same except that the allowed longitudinal acceleration even after the response time is in [−amax,brake, amax,accel].
An illustration of the extreme radiuses is given in Figure 11.
    Finally, observe that these proper responses satisfy the aforementioned two properties of the proper response for
structured scenarios: it is possible to bound the future positions of other vehicles in case an emergency will occur, and
the same proper response can be applied even if we are at a dangerous situation w.r.t. more than a single other vehicle.

3.8 Pedestrians
The proper response rules for avoiding collisions involving pedestrians (or other road users) follow the same ideas
described in previous subsections, except that we need to adjust the parameters in the definitions of safe distance
and proper response, as well as to specify pedestrians’ routes (possibly unstructured routes) and their priority w.r.t.
vehicles’ routes. In some cases, a pedestrian’s route is well defined (e.g. a zebra crossing or a sidewalk on a fast road).
In other cases, like a typical residential street, we follow the approach we have taken for unstructured roads except that
unlike vehicles that typically ride on circles, for pedestrians we constrain the change of heading, |h′(t)|, and assume
that at emergency, after the response time, the pedestrian will continue at a straight line. If the pedestrian is standing,
we assign it to all possible lines originating from his current position. The priority is set according to the type of the
road and possibly based on traffic lights. For example, in a typical residential street, a pedestrian has the priority over
the vehicles, and it follows that vehicles must yield and be cautious with respect to pedestrians. In contrast, there are
roads with a sidewalk where the common sense behavior is that vehicles should not be worried that a pedestrian on the
sidewalk will suddenly start running into the road. There, cars have the priority. Another example is a zebra crossing
with a traffic light, where the priority is set dynamically according to the light. Of course, priority is given not taken,
hence even if pedestrians do not have priority, if they entered the road at a safe distance, cars must brake and let them
pass.
    Let us illustrate the idea by some examples. The first example is a pedestrian that stands on a residential road. The
pedestrian is assigned to all routes obtained by rays originating from its current position. Her safe longitudinal distance
w.r.t. each of these virtual routes is quite short. For example, setting a delay of 500 ms, and maximal acceleration10
and braking of 2 m/s2, yields that her part of the safe longitudinal distance is 50cm. It follows that a vehicle must
be in a kinematic state such that if it will apply a proper response (acceleration for ρ seconds and then braking) it will
remain outside of a ball of radius 50cm around the pedestrian.
  10As mentioned in [5], the estimated acceleration of Usain Bolt is 3.09 m/s2.

        23

    A second example is a pedestrian standing on the sidewalk right in front of a zebra crossing, the pedestrian has a
red light, and a vehicle approaches the zebra crossing at a green light. Here, the vehicle route has the priority, hence
the vehicle can assume that the pedestrian will stay on the sidewalk. If the pedestrian enters the road while the vehicle
is at a safe longitudinal distance (w.r.t. the vehicle’s route), then the vehicle must brake (“right of way is given, not
taken”). However, if the pedestrian enters the road while the vehicle is not at a safe longitudinal distance, and as a
result the vehicle hits the pedestrian, then the vehicle is not responsible. It follows that in this situation, the vehicle
can drive at a normal speed, without worrying about the pedestrian.
    The third example is a pedestrian that runs on a residential road at 10 km per hour (which is ≈ 2.7m/s). The
possible future trajectories of the pedestrian form an isosceles triangle shape. Using the same parmeters as in the
first example, the height of this triangle is roughly 15m. It follows that cars should not enter the pedestrian’s route
at a distance smaller than 15m. But, if the car entered the pedestrian’s route at a distance larger than 15m, and the
pedestrian didn’t stop and crashed into the car, then the responsibility is of the pedestrian.

3.9 Cautiousness with respect to Occlusion
A very common human response, when blamed for an accident, falls into the “but I couldn’t see him” category. It
is, many times, true. Human sensing capabilities are limited, sometimes because of an unaware decision to focus on
a different part of the road, sometimes because of carelessness, and sometimes because of physical limitations - it is
impossible to see a little kid hidden behind a parked car. While advanced automatic sensing systems are never careless,
and have a 360◦ view of the road, they might still suffer from limited sensing due to physical occlusions or range of
sensor detection. Few examples are:
Example 1 A junction in which a building or a fence occludes traffic approaching the junction from a different route
(see illustration in Figure 12).

Example 2 When changing lanes on a highway, there is a limited view range for detecting cars arriving from behind
(see illustration in Figure 13).

Example 3 A kid that might be occluded behind a parked car.

Example 4 An obstacle ahead which is occluded by the car in front of us (see illustration in Figure 14).

    The examples above show that we might be in a dangerous situation without knowing it (due to the occlusion), and
as a result we will not respond properly. When a human driver claims “but I couldn’t see him”, a counter argument is
often “well, you should’ve been more careful”. Analogously, we should formalize what does it mean to be careful.
    The extreme form of “being careful” is to assume the worst possible scenario. That is, we should assume that
every occluded position in the world is occupied by a vehicle whose velocity is the worst possible. Unfortunately,
without additional assumptions over the occluded object, this results in an over defensive, non natural driving. To see
this, consider the simplest case of an occlusion by a static object, as given in Example 1, and depicted in Figure 12. In
any position the yellow car is, there can be a very far red car which is occluded by the building. When the yellow car
enters the corridor of the red car, there exists a high enough speed for the red car, for which this will be considered a
non-safe cut-in. This results in inability of the yellow car to merge into the main road. Of course, it is unreasonable to
limit such manoeuvres.
    This motivates us to formalize several additional “reasonable assumptions” that a driver may make with regard to
the behavior of other road users. Throughout this section, we implicitly defined “unreasonable situations” and allowed
vehicles to make the “reasonable assumption” that such cases will not happen. For example, our basic definition of self
longitudinal distance assumes that the other car will not brake stronger than amax,brake. By making this assumption,
we implicitly say that a situation in which a vehicle brakes stronger than amax,brake is an unreasonable situation, and
we allow ourselves to not fear from such a case. Of course, we also required vehicles not to cause “unreasonable
situations”, for example, we should never brake stronger than amax,brake. To tackle occlusions, we follow the exact
same rational, by defining situations that are unreasonable, and allowing the vehicle to assume they will not happen.
So, the vehicle should plan for the worst case, except these unreasonable situations. As we will see, we also require


    24

the vehicle to take into account that other vehicles may not fully observe it, hence it should be careful not to cause
unreasonable situations.
    To formalize the above, as a preliminary statement, it is clear that once an object becomes observed, we should act
according to the regular proper response rules. We denote this point in time by the Exposure Time.

Definition 23 (Exposure Time) The Exposure Time of an object is the first time in which we can see it (meaning that
nothing blocks visibility along the line from the object to the ego vehicle).

    We continue to define two types of unreasonable situations. The first deals with unreasonable situations due
to vehicles that drive unreasonably fast. Consider again the occlusion by a static object, as given in Example 1, and
depicted in Figure 12. As discussed above, if the yellow car merges into the road carelessly, it may be that the exposure
time comes after the Danger Threshold time - namely, a dangerous cut-in was performed unknowingly. However, had
there been a limit vlimit on the speed of the occluded car (the red car), the yellow car would have been able to approach
the merge point slow enough so as to make sure that it will not enter a dangerous situation w.r.t. any car whose speed
is at most vlimit. This leads to the following definition.

Definition 24 (Unreasonable Situation due to Unreasonable Speed) Consider two vehicles, c0, c1 driving on routes
r1, r2, where the two vehicles are occluded from each other until the exposure time t. Assume that t is a dangerous time
and let tb be its corresponding blame time. For i ∈ {1,2}, let vilat, vilong be the average lateral/longitudinal speed
from tb until t of vehicle i. We say that this situation is unreasonable w.r.t. parameters vilat,limit,low, vlat,limit,high,
vilong,limit,low, vlong,limit,high, if vilat is not in [vilat,limit,low, vlat,limit,high] or vilong is not in [vilong,limit,low, vlong,limit,high].
The parameters are associated with the position of each ci on the map, priority rules, and possibly on other scene
structure and conditions.

        Danger Threshold time Exposure Time




    Building    Building










Figure 12: Illustration of the blame and exposure times. During the Danger Threshold time, the red car is unobserved
by the yellow car, as depicted by the blue line bounding its view range. At the exposure time, the corner of the red car
is firstly observed.

    For example, in Figure 12, both the red and yellow car may assume that the other car will approach the intersection
slowly enough, where the upper bound on the velocity depends on the priority between the two routes. This will allow
the yellow car to merge into the main road safely, in the same manner a human driver does.
    Few of the factors which should be included in determining the constraints on the speed are given below. First,
the definition takes into account priority rules - the upper bound on the maximal speed is higher for the route with
priority. Second, the definition also considers different scene structure rules. Of particular interest is the case given
in Example 2, with its Danger Threshold time depicted in Figure 13. The red car, denoted c2, is occluded from the
yellow car, denoted c0. The lateral distance was unsafe for some time already, due to the lateral velocity of c2. The
longitudinal distance becomes unsafe in the blame time. c0 does not have priority due to the route structure. However,

        25

it is clear that the “longitudinally safe cut in” which was performed by c2 during its occlusion, would not be considered
“safe” by common sense - as c2 did not make sure to be seen. It is therefore reasonable to assume a bound on the
lateral velocity of an occluded object. Using this assumption, c0 does not have to slow down very much when passing
near the parked bus, as it can assume that no cut-in has been performed.
    The case given in Example 3, where an occluded pedestrian may jump into the road, is dealt with in the same
manner - the car can assume that the occluded pedestrian will not perform a cut-in.



    Parked Bus


    Figure 13: Example for Danger Threshold time, where different velocity constraint assumptions should be made by
    the different cars.

    Though explicitly dealing with static occluders, the reasonable speed assumptions are also applicable to moving
occluders. For example, had the bus in Figure 13 been moving slowly, c0 will still be able to assume a low lateral
velocity for c1.
    The second type of unreasonable situations is a one that stems from improper behavior of other agents. Consider
Example 4, as depicted in Figure 14. The yellow car c0 follows the red car c1, at the same speed, and at a safe distance.
The blue car c2 is at a complete stop. At the last moment, c1 swerves to the side and avoids hitting c2. If c0 can also
swerve to the side and avoid hitting c2 it must do so (as follows from Definition 13). However, it is possible that
c0 cannot avoid an accident (because there may be a car on its side), and will end up crashing into c2 from behind.
Seemingly, this accident is c0’s responsibility.

    Danger Threshold time    Exposure Time

        Unsafe        Unavoidable Accident
        Safe       Unsafe










Figure 14: Danger Threshold time and exposure time. At the Danger Threshold time, the distance between the yellow
car and the red car is safe due to the high velocity of the red car. However, the distance to the blue car is not so, due to
it being at full stop. No proper response is performed by the yellow car until the exposure time, which can result in an
accident.

    The first attempt one may take in order to deal with this situation is to indeed require c0 to always assume the
worst case situation — there might be a stopped car, c2, in front of c1. Unfortunately, one cannot drive normally on a
highway while assuming this. To illustrate the defensiveness of the driving that will result of taking this assumption,
let us consider the braking distance of c0, which is roughly the same as the safe distance w.r.t. a stopped car. This is the
distance it should keep from c1, in order to be safe w.r.t. a potential car stopped right in front of it. Let us assume that
c0 can brake at a = 10m/s2, and that it is driving at v = 30m/s, very common in a highway. The braking distance
is then d = 2av2 = 30² = 45. This means that keeping a distance of less than ≈ 45m from c (corresponding 1.5
seconds at v 20 1 to
        ), is unsafe. Clearly, common highway driving does not refrain from keeping even much less of a distance
from the front car.


    26

    Careful examination of the given example reveals the following observation: had c1 kept a safe (longitudinal)
distance from c2, there would be no problem; c1 would always be able to brake before hitting c2. c0, properly
responding to c1, is able to stop before hitting c1 - and therefore before hitting c2. This motivates the definition of our
second type of unreasonable scenarios.
Definition 25 (Unreasonable Situation due to Improper Behaviour) A situation at time t between c, c′ is Unrea-
sonable Situation due to Improper Behaviour if it is impossible to reach it by always adhering to proper response
rules, that is, there exists no sequence of states for the time range (−∞, t) which is:
    • Physically possible (in the sense it abides to reasonable velocity and acceleration bounds),
    • Not containing any improper response by either c or c′.
    An example of an unreasonable situation due to improper behaviour is the situation between the red and blue cars
depicted on the left hand side of Figure 14. In this situation, the red and blue cars are at a dangerous situation, but it is
impossible to reach this situation if they would both adhere to proper response. By allowing the yellow car to assume
that unreasonable situation due to improper behavior will not happen, when it follows the red car and might fear there
is a car c2 at a non-safe distance in front of the red car, it can assume that its velocity is reasonably large - otherwise, it
must imply that the the red car did not perform a proper response w.r.t. c2. Of course, this is a reasonable assumption,
but it may not hold, and in this case, at the exposure time, the yellow car must apply proper response (including evasive
manoeuvres if possible).
    The following definition summarizes the discussion.
Definition 26 (Proper Response in the presence of Occlusions) A vehicle must perform proper response with re-
spect to all road agents it observes. It also must perform proper response with respect to occluded ones, by assuming
that at any occluded position there might be an occluded object with any possible speed, unless this yields an unrea-
sonable situation as defined in Definition 24 and Definition 25. Finally, a vehicle must not cause an unreasonable
situation (as defined in Definition 24).

3.10 Responsibility
We have defined the notion of proper response to dangerous situations. Before an accident occurs, the situation must
be dangerous. We say that an agent is responsible for the accident if it did not comply with the proper response
contraints.
    It is not hard to see that if there are no occlusions, if two agents collide then it must be the case that at least one
of them did not comply with the proper response contraints, and this agent is responsible for the accident. However,
when there are occlusions, there may be an accident with no clear responsibility. Consider for example Figure 14. On
one hand, the yellow car is allowed to assume that if there is a vehicle c2 in front of the red car, then the red car is
applying proper response on it. So, the yellow car is not responsible for the accident. It is true that the red car did not
respond properly on the blue car, but the red car was not involved in the accident at all so it is not clear if we can blame
it for an accident between the yellow car and the blue car. In the next section we prove that if all the agents adhere to
proper response rules, then no accidents would happen.

3.11 Utopia is Possible
In Lemma 5 we have shown that if all cars on the road comply with the basic proper response rules, then there will be
no collisions. However, in the previous subsection we have shown that agents can make some reasonable assumptions
on what happens at occluded areas, and as a result, there may be an accident between two agents where none of them is
directly responsible. We now prove that even when considering occlusions, if all agents adhere to the proper response
rules as given in Definition 26, then no accidents will happen.
    The proof technique relies on the lemma below, which shows that if all agents adhere to the proper response rules
as given in Definition 26, they in fact also adhere to the basic proper response rules.



    27

    Lemma 6 If all road agents comply with the proper response rules given in Definition 26, they also comply with the
    basic proper response rules. In other words, each agent will behave as if it observes all other agents.

Proof The proof is by induction on the distance 11 between every two agents. The inductive claim is that “If all road
agents comply with the proper response rules given in Definition 26, then every pair of road agents whose distance is
at most d comply with the basic proper response rules”. The claim clearly holds for d = 0.1 (as an object at distance of
10cm must be observed). Consider some d and assume that the claim holds for every d′ < d. Assume by contradiction
that some two agents c1, c2 of distance d do not comply with the basic proper response rules. It must be the case
that c1, c2 are occluded from each other by another agent c3. But then, c3 must perform basic proper response w.r.t.
both c1 and c2. In this case, by Definition 25, the situation between c1, c3 and c2, c3 is not unreasonable, from which
we deduce that c1, c2 must perform proper response with respect to each other, and we reached a contradiction. This
completes the inductive argument.

      Combining the above lemma with the argument in Lemma 5 we conclude that:
    Corollary 2 (Utopia is possible)                                If all road agents comply with the proper response rules given in Definition 26 then
    no collisions can occur.

    4 Driving Policy

    A driving policy is a mapping from a sensing state (a description of the world around us) into a driving command (e.g.,
    the command is lateral and longitudinal accelerations for the coming second, which determines where and at what
    speed should the car be in one second from now). The driving command is passed to a controller, that aims at actually
    moving the car to the desired position/speed.
                                          In the previous sections we described a formal safety model and proposed constraints on the commands issued by
    the driving policy that guarantee safety. The constraints on safety are designed for extreme cases. Typically, we do
    not want to even need these constraints, and would like to construct a driving policy that leads to a comfortable ride.
    The focus of this section is on how to build an efficient driving policy, in particular, one that requires computational
    resources that can scale to millions of cars. For now, we ignore the issue of how to obtain the sensing state and assume
    an utopic sensing state, that faithfully represents the world around us without any limitations. In later sections we will
    discuss the effect of inaccuracies in the sensing state on the driving policy.
                                            We can cast the problem of defining a driving policy in the language of Reinforcement Learning (RL). At each
    iteration of RL, an agent observes a state describing the world, denoted st, and should pick an action, denoted at,
    based on a policy function, π, that maps states into actions. As a result of its action and other factors out of its control
    (such as the actions of other agents), the state of the world is changed to st+1. We denote a (state,action) sequence by
    s¯ = ((s1, a1), (s2, a2), . . . , (slen(¯s), alen(¯s))). Every policy induces a probability function over (state,action) sequences.
    This probability function is affected by the actions taken by the agent, but also depends on the environment (and in
    particular, on how other agents behave). We denote by Pπ the probability over (state,action) sequences induced by
    π. The quality of a policy is defined to be Es¯∼P [ρ(¯
                                                          s)], where ρ(¯
    sequence s¯ is. In most case, ρ(¯      π                    ∑                                     s) is a reward function that measures how good the
                                     s) takes the form ρ(¯
        s) =                                               len(¯s) ρ(s , a )
                                                           t=1 t     t                                        , where ρ(s, a) is an instantaneous reward
    function, that measures the immediate quality of being at state s and performing action a. For simplicity, we stick to
    this simpler case.
      To cast the driving policy problem in the above RL language, let st                                        be some representation of the road, and
    the positions, velocities, and accelerations, of the ego vehicle as well as other road users.                                Let at be a lateral and
    longitudinal acceleration command.                                       The next state, st+1, depends on at as well as on how the other agents will
    behave. The instantaneous reward, ρ(st, at), may depend on the relative position/velocities/acceleration to other cars,
    the difference between our speed and the desired speed, whether we follow the desired route, whether our acceleration
    is comfortable etc.
    11This is an example of induction over the reals (see for example [4]). We note that since a road agent has a minimal size (say, of 1cm), it is easy
    to construct an analogue inductive argument over the natural numbers, while discretizing the distance.


    28

    The main difficulty of deciding what action should the policy take at time t stems from the fact that one needs to
estimate the long term effect of this action on the reward. For example, in the context of driving policy, an action that is
taken at time t may seem a good action for the present (that is, the reward value ρ(st, at) is good), but might lead to an
accident after 5 seconds (that is, the reward value in 5 seconds would be catastrophic). We therefore need to estimate
the long term quality of performing an action a when the agent is at state s. This is often called the Q function, namely,
Q(s, a) should reflect the long term quality of performing action a at state s. Given such a Q function, the natural
choice of an action is to pick the one with highest quality, π(s) = argmaxa Q(s, a).
    The immediate questions are how to define Q and how to evaluate Q efficiently. Let us first make the (completely
non-realistic) simplifying assumption that st+1 is some deterministic function of (st, at), namely, st+1 = f (st, at).
The reader familiar with Markov Decision Processes (MDPs), will quickly notice that this assumption is even stronger
than the Markovian assumption of MDPs (i.e., that st+1 is conditionally independent of the past given (st, at)). As
noted in [7], even the Markovian assumption is not adequate for multi-agent scenarios, such as driving, and we will
therefore later relax the assumption.
    Under this simplifying assumption, given st, for every sequence of decisions for T steps, (at, . . . , at+T ), we can
calculate exactly the future states (st+1, . . . , st+T +1) as well as the reward values for times t, . . . , T . Summarizing all
these reward values into a single number, e.g. by taking their sum ∑Tτ=t ρ(sτ , aτ ), we can define Q(s, a) as follows:

        Q(s, a) = (aₜ max ∑T ρ(sτ , aτ ) s.t. st = s, at = a, ∀τ, sτ+1 = f (sτ , aτ )
        ,...,at+T ) τ=t

That is, Q(s, a) is the best future we can hope for, if we are currently at state s and immediately perform action a.
    Let us discuss how to calculate Q. The first idea is to discretize the set of possible actions, A, into a finite set
Aˆ, and simply traverse all action sequences in the discretized set. Then, the runtime is dominated by the number of
discrete action sequences, |Aˆ|T . If Aˆ represents 10 lateral accelerations and 10 longitudinal accelerations, we obtain
100T possibilities, which becomes infeasible even for small values of T . While there are heuristics for speeding up
the search (e.g. coarse-to-fine search), this brute-force approach requires tremendous computational power.
    The parameter T is often called the “time horizon of planning”, and it controls a natural tradeoff between com-
putation time and quality of evaluation — the larger T is, the better our evaluation of the current action (since we
explicitly examine its effect deeper into the future), but on the other hand, a larger T increases the computation time
exponentially. To understand why we may need a large value of T , consider a scenario in which we are 200 meters be-
fore a highway exit and we should take it. When the time horizon is long enough, the cumulative reward will indicate
if at some time τ between t and t + T we have arrived to the exit lane. On the other hand, for a short time horizon,
even if we perform the right immediate action we will not know if it will lead us eventually to the exit lane.
    A different approach attempts to perform offline calculations in order to construct an approximation of Q, denoted
Qˆ, and then during the online run of the policy, use Qˆ as an approximation to Q, without explicitly rolling out the
future. One way to construct such an approximation is to discretize both the action domain and the state domain.
Denote by A,ˆ Sˆ these discretized sets. We can perform an offline calculation for evaluating the value of Q(s, a)
for every (s, a) ∈ Sˆ × Aˆ. Then, for every a ∈ Aˆ we define Qˆ(st, a) to be Q(s, a) for s = argmins∈Sˆ ‖s − st‖.
Furthermore, based on the pioneering work of Bellman [2, 3], we can calculate Q(s, a) for every (s, a) ∈ Sˆ × Aˆ,
based on dynamic programming procedures (such as the Value Iteration algorithm), and under our assumptions, the
total runtime is order of T |Aˆ| |Sˆ|. The main problem with this approach is that in any reasonable approximation, Sˆ
is extremely large (due to the curse of dimensionality). Indeed, the sensing state should represent 6 parameters for
every other relevant vehicle in the sense — the longitudinal and lateral position, velocity, and acceleration. Even if we
discretize each dimension to only 10 values (a very crude discretization), since we have 6 dimensions, to describe a
single car we need 106 states, and to describe k cars we need 106k states. This leads to unrealistic memory requirements
for storing the values of Q for every (s, a) in Sˆ × Aˆ.
    A popular approach to deal with this curse of dimensionality is to restrict Q to come from a restricted class of
functions (often called a hypothesis class), such as linear functions over manually determined features or deep neural
networks. For example, [6] learned a deep neural network that approximates Q in the context of playing Atari games.
This leads to a resource-efficient solution, provided that the class of functions that approximate Q can be evaluated
efficiently. However, there are several disadvantages of this approach. First, it is not known if the chosen class of

        29

functions contain a good approximation to the desired Q function. Second, even if such function exists, it is not
known if existing algorithms will manage to learn it efficiently. So far, there are not many success stories for learning
a Q function for complicated multi-agent problems, such as the ones we are facing in driving. There are several
theoretical reasons why this task is difficult. We have already mentioned that the Markovian assumption, underlying
existing methods, is problematic. But, a more severe problem is that we are facing a very small signal-to-noise ratio
due to the time resolution of decision making, as we explain below.
    Consider a simple scenario in which we need to change lane in order to take a highway exit in 200 meters and
the road is currently empty. The best decision is to start making the lane change. We are making decisions every
0.1 second, so at the current time t, the best value of Q(st, a) should be for the action a corresponding to a small
lateral acceleration to the right. Consider the action a′ that corresponds to zero lateral acceleration. Since there is
a very little difference between starting the change lane now, or in 0.1 seconds, the values of Q(st, a) and Q(st, a′)
are almost the same. In other words, there is very little advantage for picking a over a′. On the other hand, since
we are using a function approximation for Q, and since there is noise in measuring the state st, it is likely that our
approximation to the Q value is noisy. This yields a very small signal-to-noise ratio, which leads to an extremely slow
learning, especially for stochastic learning algorithms which are heavily used for the neural networks approximation
class. However, as noted in [1], this problem is not a property of any particular function approximation class, but
rather, it is inherent in the definition of the Q function.
    In summary, existing approaches can be roughly divided into two camps. The first one is the brute-force approach
which includes searching over many sequences of actions or discretizing the sensing state domain and maintaining a
huge table in memory. This approach can lead to a very accurate approximation of Q but requires unleashed resources,
either in terms of computation time or in terms of memory. The second one is a resource efficient approach in which
we either search for short sequences of actions or we apply a function approximation to Q. In both cases, we pay by
having a less accurate approximation of Q, that might lead to poor decisions.
    Our approach to constructing a Q function that is both resource-efficient and accurate is to depart from geometrical
actions and to adapt a semantic action space, as described in the next subsection.

4.1 Semantics to the rescue
To motivate our semantic approach, consider a teenager that just got his driving license. His father seats next to him
and gives him “driving policy” instructions. These instructions are not geometric — they do not take the form “drive
13.7 meters at the current speed and then accelerate at a rate of 0.8 m/s2”. Instead, the instructions are of semantic
nature — “follow the car in front of you” or “quickly overtake that car on your left”. We formalize a semantic language
for such instructions, and use them as a semantic action space. We then define the Q function over the semantic action
space. We show that a semantic action can have a very long time horizon, which allows us to estimate Q(s, a) without
planning for many future semantic actions. Yet, the total number of semantic actions is still small. This allows us to
obtain an accurate estimation of the Q function while still being resource efficient. Furthermore, as we show later, we
combine learning techniques for further improving the quality function, while not suffering from a small signal-to-
noise ratio due to a significant difference between different semantic actions.
    We now define our semantic action space. The main idea is to define lateral and longitudinal goals, as well as the
aggressiveness level of achieving them. Lateral goals are desired positions in lane coordinate system (e.g., “my goal
is to be in the center of lane number 2”). Longitudinal goals are of three types. The first is relative position and speed
w.r.t. other vehicles (e.g., “my goal is to be behind car number 3, at its same speed, and at a distance of 2 seconds
from it”). The second is a speed target (e.g., “drive at the allowed speed for this road times 110%”). The third is a
speed constraint at a certain position (e.g., when approaching a junction, “speed of 0 at the stop line”, or when passing
a sharp curve, “speed of at most 60kmh at a certain position on the curve”). For the third option we can instead apply
a “speed profile” (few discrete points on the route and the desired speed at each of them). A reasonable number of
lateral goals is bounded by 16 = 4 × 4 (4 positions in at most 4 relevant lanes). A reasonable number of longitudinal
goals of the first type is bounded by 8 × 2 × 3 = 48 (8 relevant cars, whether to be in front or behind them, and
3 relevant distances). A reasonable number of absolute speed targets are 10, and a reasonable upper bound on the
number of speed constraints is 2. To implement a given lateral or longitudinal goal, we need to apply acceleration and
then deceleration (or the other way around). The aggressiveness of achieving the goal is a maximal (in absolute value)


    30

acceleration/deceleration to achieve the goal. With the goal and aggressivness defined, we have a closed form formula
to implement the goal, using kinematic calculations. The only remaining part is to determine the combination between
the lateral and longitudinal goals (e.g., “start with the lateral goal, and exactly at the middle of it, start to apply also
the longitudinal goal”). A set of 5 mixing times and 3 aggressiveness levels seems more than enough. All in all, we
        4
have obtained a semantic action space whose size is ≈ 10 .
    It is worth mentioning that the variable time required for fulfilling these semantic actions is not the same as the
frequency of the decision making process. To be reactive to the dynamic world, we should make decisions at a high
frequency — in our implementation, every 100ms. In contrast, each such decision is based on constructing a trajectory
that fulfills some semantic action, which will have a much longer time horizon (say, 10 seconds). We use the longer
time horizon since it helps us to better evaluate the short term prefix of the trajectory. In the next subsection we discuss
the evaluation of semantic actions, but before that, we argue that semantic actions induce a sufficient search space.

Is this sufficient: We have seen that a semantic action space induces a subset of all possible geometrical curves,
whose size is exponentially smaller (in T ) than enumerating all possible geometrical curves. The first immediate
question is whether the set of short term prefixes of this smaller search space contains all geometric commands that
we will ever want to use. We argue that this is indeed sufficient in the following sense. If the road is free of other
agents, then there is no reason to make changes except setting a lateral goal and/or absolute acceleration commands
and/or speed constraints on certain positions. If the road contains other agents, we may want to negotiate the right of
way with the other agents. In this case, it suffices to set longitudinal goals relatively to the other agents. The exact
implementation of these goals in the long run may vary, but the short term prefixes will not change by much. Hence,
we obtain a very good cover of the relevant short term geometrical commands.

4.2 Constructing an evaluation function for semantic actions
We have defined a semantic set of actions, denoted by As. Given that we are currently in state s, we need a way
to choose the best as ∈ As. To tackle this problem, we follow a similar approach to the options mechanism of [8].
The basic idea is to think of as as a meta-action (or an option). For each choice of a meta-action, we construct a
geometrical trajectory (s1, a1), . . . , (sT , aT ) that represents an implementation of the meta-action, as. To do so we of
course need to know how other agents will react to our actions, but for now we are still relying on
assumption that st+1 = f (st, at) for some known deterministic function f . We can now use 1 ∑(the non-realistic)T
good approximation of the quality of performing the semantic action as when we are at state s1.T t=1 ρ(st, at) as a
    Most of the time, this simple approach yields a powerful driving policy. However, in some situations a more
sophisticated quality function is required. For example, suppose that we are following a slow truck before an exit lane,
where we need to take the exit lane. One semantic option is to keep driving slowly behind the truck. Another one is to
overtake the truck, hoping that later we can get back to the exit lane and make the exit on time. The quality measure
described previously does not consider what will happen after we will overtake the truck, and hence we will not choose
the second semantic action even if there is enough time to make the overtake and return to the exit lane. Machine
learning can help us to construct a better evaluation of semantic actions, that will take into account more than the
immediate semantic actions. Previously, we have argued that learning a Q function over immediate geometric actions
is problematic due to the low signal-to-noise ratio (the lack of advantage). This is not problematic when considering
semantic actions, both because there is a large difference between performing the different semantic actions and
because the semantic time horizon (how many semantic actions we take into account) is very small (probably less than
three in most cases).
    Another advantage of applying machine learning is for the sake of generalization: we can probably set an adequate
evaluation function for every road, by a manual inspection of the properties of the road, and maybe some trial and error.
But, can we automatically generalize to any road? Here, a machine learning approach can be trained on a large variety
of road types so as to generalize to unseen roads as well.
    To summarize, our semantic action space allows to enjoy the benefits of both worlds: semantic actions contain
information on a long time horizon, hence we can obtain a very accurate evaluation of their quality while being
resource efficient.



    31

4.3 The dynamics of the other agents
So far, we have relied on the assumption that st+1 is a deterministic function of st and at. As we have emphasized
previously, this assumption is completely not realistic as our actions affect the behavior of other road users. While we
do take into account some reactions of other agents to our actions (for example, we assume that if we will perform a
safe cut-in, then the car behind us will adjust its speed so as not to hit us from behind), it is not realistic to assume that
we model all of the dynamics of other agents.
    The solution to this problem is to re-apply our decision making at a high frequency, and by doing this, we constantly
adapt our policy to the parts of the environment that are beyond our modeling. In a sense, one can think of this as a
Markovization of the world at every step. This is a common technique that tends to work very good in practice as long
as the balance between modeling error and frequency of planning is adequate.

5 Sensing

In this section we describe the sensing state, which is a description of the relevant information of the scene, and forms
the input to the driving policy module. By and large, the sensing state contains static and dynamic objects. The
static objects are lanes, physical road delimiters, constraints on speed, constraints on the right of way, and information
on occluders (e.g. a fence that occludes relevant part of a merging road). Dynamic objects are vehicles (bounding
box, speed, acceleration), pedestrians (bounding box, speed, acceleration), traffic lights, dynamic road delimiters (e.g.
cones at a construction area), temporary traffic signs and police activity, and other obstacles on the road (e.g. an
animal, a mattress that fell from a truck, etc.).
    In any reasonable sensor setting, we cannot expect to obtain the exact sensing state, s. Instead, we view raw sensor
and mapping data, which we denote by x ∈ X , and there is a sensing system that takes x and produces an approximate
sensing state. Formally,
Definition 27 (Sensing system) Let S denote the domain of sensing state and let X be the domain of raw sensor and
mapping data. A sensing system is a function sˆ : X → S.
    It is important to understand when we should accept sˆ(x) as a reasonable approximation to s. The ultimate way to
answer this question is by examining the implications of this approximation on the performance of our driving policy
in general, and on the safety in particular. Following our safety-comfort distinction, here again we distinguish between
sensing mistakes that lead to non-safe behaviour and sensing mistakes that affect the comfort aspects of the ride.
    Before we dive into the details, let us first describe the type of errors a sensing system might make:
    • False negative: the sensing system misses an object
    • False positive: the sensing system indicates a “ghost” object
    • Inaccurate measurements: the sensing system correctly detects an object but incorrectly estimates its position or
      speed
    • Inaccurate semantic: the sensing system correctly detects an object but misinterpret its semantic meaning, for
      example, the color of a traffic light

5.1 Comfort
Recall that for a semantic action a, we have used Q(s, a) to denote our evaluation of a given that the current sensing
state is s. Our policy picks the action π(s) = argmaxa Q(s, a). If we inject sˆ(x) instead of s then the selected
semantic action would be π(ˆ
        s(x)) = argmax Q(ˆ
        s(x), a). Clearly, if π(ˆ
as a good approximation to s. But, it is also not bad at all to picka π(ˆ s(x)) = π(s) then sˆ(x) should be accepted
        s(x)) as long as the quality of π(ˆ
        s(x)) w.r.t. the true
state, s, is almost optimal, namely, Q(s, π(ˆ
        s(x))) ≥ Q(s, π(s)) − , for some parameter . We say that sˆ is -accurate
w.r.t. Q in such case. Naturally, we cannot expect the sensing system to be -accurate all the time. We therefore also
allow the sensing system to fail with some small probability δ. In such a case we say that sˆ is Probably (w.p. of at
least 1 − δ), Approximately (up to ), Correct, or PAC for short (borrowing Valiant’s PAC learning terminology [9]).

        32

    We may use several (, δ) pairs for evaluating different aspects of the system. For example, we can choose three
thresholds, 1 < 2 < 3 to represent mild, medium, and gross mistakes, and for each one of them set a different value
of δ. This leads to the following definition.

Definition 28 (PAC sensing system) Let ((1, δ1), . . . , (k, δk)) be a set of (accuracy,confidence) pairs, let S be the
sensing state domain, let X be the raw sensor and mapping data domain, and let D be a distribution over X × S. Let
A be an action space, Q : S × A → R be a quality function, and π : S → A be such that π(s) ∈ argmaxa Q(s, a).
A sensing system, sˆ : X → S, is Probably-Approximately-Correct (PAC) with respect to the above parameters if for
every i ∈ {1, . . . , k} we have that P(x,s)∼D[Q(s, π(ˆ
        s(x))) ≥ Q(s, π(s)) − i] ≥ 1 − δi.

    Few remarks are in order:
    • The definition depends on a distribution D over X × S. It is important to emphasize that we construct this dis-
      tribution by recording data of many human drivers but not by following the particular policy of our autonomous
      vehicle. While the latter seems more adequate, it necessitates online validation, which makes the development
      of the sensing system impractical. Since the effect of any reasonable policy on D is minor, by applying simple
      data augmentation techniques we can construct an adequate distribution and then perform offline validation after
      every major update of the sensing system.
    • The definition provides a sufficient, but not necessary, condition for comfort ride using sˆ. It is not necessary
      because it ignores the important fact that short term wrong decisions have little effect on the comfort of the ride.
      For example, suppose that there is a vehicle 100 meters in front of us, and it is slower than the host vehicle.
      The best decision would be to start accelerating slightly now. If the sensing system misses this vehicle, but
      will detect it in the next time (after 100 mili-seconds), then the difference between the two rides will not be
      noticeable. To simplify the presentation, we have neglected this issue and required a stronger condition. The
      adaptation to a multi-frame PAC definition is conceptually straightforward, but involves more technicality and
      therefore we omit it.
    We next derive design principles that follow from the above PAC definition. Recall that we have described several
types of sensing mistakes. For mistakes of types false negative, false positive, and inaccurate semantic, either the
mistakes will be on non-relevant objects (e.g., a traffic light for left turn when we are proceeding straight), or they will
be captured by the δ part of the definition. We therefore focus on the “inaccurate measurements” type of errors, which
happens frequently.
    Somewhat surprisingly, we will show that the popular approach of measuring the accuracy of a sensing system
via ego-accuracy (that is, by measuring the accuracy of position of every object with respect to the host vehicle) is
not sufficient for ensuring PAC sensing system. We will then propose a different approach that ensures PAC sensing
system, and will show how to obtain it efficiently. We start with some additional definitions.
    For every object o in the scene, let p(o), pˆ(o) be the positions of o in the coordinate system of the host vehicle
according to s, sˆ(x), respectively. Note that the distance between o and the host vehicle is ‖p‖. The additive error of
pˆ is ‖p(o) − pˆ(o)‖.The relative error of pˆ(o), w.r.t. the distance between o and the host vehicle, is the additive error
divided by ‖p(o)‖, namely ‖p(o)−pˆ(o)‖ .
        ‖p(o)‖
    We first argue that it is not realistic to require that the additive error is small for far away objects. Indeed, consider
o to be a vehicle at a distance of 150 meters from the host vehicle, and let be of moderate size, say = 0.1. For
additive accuracy, it means that we should know the position of the vehicle up to 10cm of accuracy. This is not realistic
for reasonably priced sensors. On the other hand, for relative accuracy we need to estimate the position up to 10%,
which amounts to 15m of accuracy. This is feasible to achieve (as we will describe later).
    We say that a sensing system, sˆ, positions a set of objects, O, in an -ego-accurate way, if for every o ∈ O, the
(relative) error between p(o) and pˆ(o) is at most . The following example shows that an -ego-accurate sensing state
does not guarantee PAC sensing system with respect to every reasonable Q. Indeed, consider a scenario in which the
host vehicle drives at a speed of 30m/s, and there is a stopped vehicle 150 meters in front of it. If this vehicle is in
the ego lane, and there is no option to change lanes in time, we must start decelerating now at a rate of at least 3m/s2
(otherwise, we will either not stop in time or we will need to decelerate strongly later). On the other hand, if the
vehicle is on the side of the road, we don’t need to apply a strong deceleration. Suppose that p(o) is one of these cases

        33

    while pˆ(o) is the other case, and there is a 5 meters difference between these two positions. Then, the relative error of
    pˆ(o) is
                                            ‖pˆ(o) − p(o)‖  5
                                                ‖p(o)‖ = 150 = 301         ≤ 0.034 .
That is, our sensing system may be -ego-accurate for a rather small value of (less than 3.5% error), and yet, for any
reasonable Q function, the values of Q are completely different since we are confusing between a situation in which
we need to brake strongly and a situation in which we do not need to brake strongly.
    The above example shows that -ego-accuracy does not guarantee that our sensing system is PAC. Is there another
property that is sufficient for PAC sensing system? Naturally, the answer to this question depends on Q. We will
describe a family of Q functions for which there is a simple property of the positioning that guarantees PAC sensing
system. Intuitively, the problem of -ego-accuracy is that it might lead to semantic mistakes — in the aforementioned
example, even though sˆ was -ego-accurate with  < 3.5%, it mis-assigned the vehicle to the correct lane. To solve
this problem, we rely on semantic units for lateral position.
Definition 29 (semantic units) A lane center is a simple natural curve, namely, it is a differentiable, ∫injective, map-
ping ` : [a, b] → R3, where for every a ≤ t1 < t2 ≤ b we have that the length Length(t1, t2) := τt=t2 1 |`′(τ )|dτ
    equals to t − t      of the             is a function   : [a,  ] → R . The projection    a point x         R
        2     1. The width     lane             w             b             +        of      ∈                    3 onto the
    curve is the point on the curve closest to x, namely, the point `(tx) for tx = argmint∈[a,b] ‖`(t) − x‖. The semantic
    longitudinal position of x w.r.t. the lane is tx and the semantic lateral position of x w.r.t. the lane is ‖`(tx)−x‖/w(tx).
    Semantic speed and acceleration are defined as first and second derivatives of the above.
          Similarly to geometrical units, for semantic longitudinal distance we use relative error: if sˆ induces a semantic
    longitudinal distance of pˆ(o) for some object, while the true distance is p(o), then the relative error is |pˆ(o)−p(o)|
                                                                                                                 max{p(o),1}
    (where the maximum in the denominator deals with cases in which the object has almost the same longitudinal distance
    (e.g., a car next to us on another lane). Since semantic lateral distances are small we can use additive error for them.
    This leads to the following defintion:
    Definition 30 (error in semantic units)       Let ` be a lane and suppose that the semantic longitudinal distance of the
    host vehicle w.r.t. the lane is 0. Let x ∈ R3 be a point and let plat(x), plon(x) be the semantic lateral and longitudinal
    distances to the point w.r.t. the lane. Let pˆlat(x), pˆlon(x) be approximated measurements. The distance between pˆ and
    p w.r.t. x is defined as
        d(ˆ                                     {                          |pˆ   (x) − }
        p, p; x) =                          max     |pˆlat(x) − plat(x)| ,  lon     plon(x)|
        max{plon(x), 1}
    The error of the lateral and longitudinal semantic velocities is defined analogously.
    Equipped with the above definition, we are ready to define the property of Q and the corresponding sufficient
condition for PAC sensing system.
Definition 31 (Semantically-Lipschitz Q) A Q function is L-semantically-Lipschitz if for every a, s, sˆ, |Q(s, a) −
Q(ˆ
   s(x), a)| ≤ L maxo d(ˆ
        p, p; o), where p, ˆ p are the measurements induced by s, sˆ on an object o.
    As an immediate corollary we obtain:
Lemma 7 If Q is L-semantically-Lipschitz and a sensing system sˆ produces semantic measurements such that with
probability of at least 1 − δ we have d(ˆ
        p, p; o) ≤ /L, then sˆ is a PAC sensing system with parameters , δ.

    5.2 Safety
    We now discuss sensing mistakes that lead to non-safe behavior. As mentioned before, our policy is provably safe, in
    the sense that it won’t lead to accidents of the autonomous vehicle’s blame. Such accidents might still occur due to
    hardware failure (e.g., a break down of all the sensors or exploding tire on the highway), software failure (a significant
    bug in some of the modules), or a sensing mistake. Our ultimate goal is that the probability of such events will be
    extremely small — a probability of 10−9 for such an accident per hour. To appreciate this number, the average number

                                                            34

of hours an american driver spends on the road is (as of 2016) less than 300. So, in expectation, one needs to live 3.3
million years to be in an accident.
    Roughly speaking, there are two types of safety-critic sensing mistake. The first type is a safety-critic miss,
meaning that a dangerous situation is considered non-dangerous according to our sensing system. The second type is
a safety-critic ghost, meaning that a non-dangerous situation is considered dangerous according to our sensing system.
Safety-critic misses are obviously dangerous as we will not know that we should respond properly to the danger.
Safety-critic ghosts might be dangerous when our speed is high, we brake hard for no reason, and there is a car behind
us.
    Usually, a safety-critic miss is caused by a false negative while a safety-critic ghost is caused by a false positive.
Such mistakes can also be caused from significantly incorrect measurements, but in most cases, our comfort objective
ensures we are far away from the boundaries of non-safe distances, and therefore reasonable measurement errors are
unlikely to lead to safety-critic mistakes.
    How can we ensure that the probability of safety-critic mistakes will be very small, say, smaller than 10−9 per
hour? As followed from Lemma 1, without making further assumptions we need to check our system on more than
109 hours of driving. This is unrealistic (or at least extremely challenging) — it amounts to recording the driving of
3.3 million cars over a year. Furthermore, building a system that achieves such a high accuracy is a great challenge.
Our solution for both the system design and validation challenges is to rely on several sub-systems, each of which
is engineered independently and depends on a different technology, and the systems are fused together in a way that
ensures boosting of their individual accuracy.
    Suppose we build 3 sub-systems, denoted, s1, s2, s3 (the extension to more than 3 is straightforward). Each sub-
system should decide if the current situation is dangerous or not. Situations which are non-dangerous according to the
majority of the sub-systems (2 in our case) are considered safe.
    Let us now analyze the performance of this fusion scheme. We rely on the following definition:
Definition 32 (One side c-approximate independent) Two Bernoulli random variables r1, r2 are called one side c-
approximate independent if
        P[r1 ∧ r2] ≤ c P[r1] P[r2] .
For i ∈ {1, 2, 3}, denote by emi , egi the Bernoulli random variables that indicate if sub-system i has a safety-critic
miss/ghost respectively. Similarly, em, eg indicate a safety-critic miss/ghost of the fusion system. We rely on the
assumption that for any pair i = j, the random variables emi , emj are one sided c-approximate independent, and the
same holds for egi , egj . Before explaining why this assumption is reasonable, let us first analyze its implication. We can
bound the probability of em by:

                                   3
    P[em] = P[em1 ∧ em2 ∧ em3  ] +                            ∑ P[¬emj ∧ ∧i=j emi  ]
                                                            j=1

     ≤ 3 P[em1  ∧ em2                                ∧ em] + ∑3 P[¬em ∧ ∧          m
                               3                                    j  i=j ei       ]
                                   j=1

     = ∑3 P[∧i=j emi    ]
     j=1
     ≤ c ∑3    ∏ P[emi  ].
      j=1 i=j

    Therefore, if all sub-systems have P[em] ≤ p then P[em] ≤ 3
          i                        c p2. The exact same derivation holds for the safety-critic
ghost mistakes. By applying a union bound we therefore conclude:
Corollary 3 Assume that for any pair i = j, the random variables emi , emj are one sided c-approximate independent,
and the same holds for egi , egj . Assume also that for every i, P[emi ] ≤ p and P[egi ] ≤ p. Then,

                P[em ∨ eg] ≤       6                      c p2 .

                               35

This corollary allows us to use significantly smaller data sets in order to validate the sensing system. For example,
if we would like to achieve a safety-critic mistake probability of 10−9, instead of taking order of 109 examples, it
suffices to take order of 105 examples and test each system separately.
    It is left to reason about the rational behind the one sided independence assumption. There are pairs of sensors that
yield completely non-correlated errors. For example, radar works well in bad weather conditions but might fail due
to non-relevant metallic objects, as opposed to camera that is affected by bad weather but is not likely to be affected
by metallic objects. Seemingly, camera and lidar have common sources of mistakes — both are affected by foggy
weather, heavy rain or snow. However, the type of mistake for camera and lidar would be different — camera might
miss objects due to bad weather while lidar might detect a ghost due to reflections from particles in the air. Since we
have distinguished between the two types of mistakes, the approximate independency is still likely to hold.

Remark 9 Our definition of safety-critic ghost requires that the situation is dangerous by at least two sensors. We
argue that even in difficult conditions (e.g. heavy fog), this is unlikely to happen. The reason is that in such situations,
systems that are affected by the difficult conditions (e.g. the lidar), will dictate a very defensive driving to the policy,
as they can declare that high velocity and lateral maneuvers would lead to a dangerous situation. As a result, we
will drive slowly, and then even if we require an emergency stop, it is not dangerous due to the low speed of driving.
Therefore, an adaptation of the driving style to the conditions of the road will follow from the definitions.

5.3 Building a scalable sensing system
We have described the requirements from a sensing system, both in terms of comfort and safety. We now briefly
suggest our approach for building a sensing system that meets these requirements while being scalable.
    There are three main components of our sensing system. The first is long range, 360 degrees coverage, of the
scene based on cameras. The three main advantages of cameras are: (1) high resolution, (2) texture, (3) price. The low
price enables a scalable system. The texture enables to understand the semantics of the scene, including lane marks,
traffic light, intentions of pedestrians, and more. The high resolution enables a long range of detection. Furthermore,
detecting lane marks and objects in the same domain enables excellent semantic lateral accuracy. The two main
disadvantages of cameras are: (1) the information is 2D and estimating longitudinal distance is difficult, (2) sensitivity
to lighting conditions (low sun, bad weather). We overcome these difficulties using the next two components of our
system.
    The second component of our system is a semantic high-definition mapping technology, called Road Experience
Management (REM). A common geometrical approach to map creation is to record a cloud of 3D points (obtained by a
lidar) in the map creation process, and then, localization on the map is obtained by matching the existing lidar points to
the ones in the map. There are several disadvantages of this approach. First, it requires a large memory per kilometer of
mapping data, as we need to save many points. This necessitates an expensive communication infrastructure. Second,
only few cars are equipped with lidar sensors, and therefore, the map is updated very infrequently. This is problematic
as changes in the road can occur (construction zones, hazards), and the “time-to-reflect-reality” of lidar-based mapping
solutions is large. In contrast, REM follows a semantic-based approach. The idea is to leverage the large number of
vehicles that are equipped with cameras and with software that detects semantically meaningful objects in the scene
(lane marks, curbs, poles, traffic lights, etc.). Nowadays, many new cars are equipped with ADAS systems which
can be leveraged for crowd source based creation of the map. Since the processing is done on the vehicle side, only
a small amount of semantic data should be communicated to the cloud. This allows a very frequent update of the
map in a scalable way. In addition, the autonomous vehicles can receive the small sized mapping data over existing
communication platforms (the cellular network). Finally, highly accurate localization on the map can be obtained
based on cameras, without the need for expensive lidars.
    REM is used for three purposes. First, it gives us a foresight on the static structure of the road (we can plan
for a highway exit way in advance). Second, it gives us another source of accurate information of all of the static
information, which together with the camera detections yields a robust view of the static part of the world. Third,
it solves the problem of lifting the 2D information from the image plane into the 3D world as follows. The map
describes all of the lanes as curves in the 3D world. Localization of the ego vehicle on the map enables to trivially lift
every object on the road from the image plane to its 3D position. This yields a positioning system that adheres to the
accuracy in semantic units described in Section 5.1.

        36

    The third component of our system is a complementary radar and lidar system. This system serves two purposes.
First, they enable to yield an extremely high accuracy for the sake of safety (as described in Section 5.2). Second, they
give direct measurements on speed and distances, which further improves the comfort of the ride.

References

[1] Leemon C Baird. Reinforcement learning in continuous time: Advantage updating. In Neural Networks, 1994.
    IEEE World Congress on Computational Intelligence., 1994 IEEE International Conference on, volume 4, pages
    2448–2453. IEEE, 1994.
[2] Richard Bellman. Dynamic programming and lagrange multipliers. Proceedings of the National Academy of
    Sciences of the United States of America, 42(10):767, 1956.
[3] Richard Bellman. Introduction to the mathematical theory of control processes, volume 2. IMA, 1971.
[4] Pete L Clark. The instructor’s guide to real induction. arXiv preprint arXiv:1208.0973, 2012.
[5] Peng Lin, Jian Ma, and Siuming Lo. Discrete element crowd model for pedestrian evacuation through an exit.
    Chinese Physics B, 25(3):034501, 2016.
[6] Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G Bellemare, Alex
    Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, et al. Human-level control through deep
    reinforcement learning. Nature, 518(7540):529–533, 2015.
[7] Shai Shalev-Shwartz, Shaked Shammah, and Amnon Shashua. Safe, multi-agent, reinforcement learning for
    autonomous driving. arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.03295, 2016.
[8] Richard S Sutton, Doina Precup, and Satinder Singh. Between mdps and semi-mdps: A framework for temporal
    abstraction in reinforcement learning. Artificial intelligence, 112(1):181–211, 1999.
[9] L. G. Valiant. A theory of the learnable. Communications of the ACM, 27(11):1134–1142, November 1984.


    A   Technical Lemmas

    A.1 Technical Lemma 1
    Lemma 8 For all x ∈ [0, 0.1], it holds that 1 − x ≥ e−2x.

Proof Let f (x) = 1 − x − e−2x. Our goal is to show f (x) ≥ 0 for x ∈ [0, 0.1]. Note that f (0) = 0, and it is therefore
sufficient to have that f ′(x) ≥ 0 in the aforementioned range. Explicitly, f ′(x) = −1 + 2e−2x. Clearly, f ′(0) = 1,
and it is monotonically decreasing, hence it is sufficient to verify that f ′(0.1) > 0, which is easy to do numerically,
f ′(0.1) ≈ 0.637.



    Acknowledgments

    We thank Marc Lavabre from Renault for fruitful discussions. We thank Jack Weast for assisting with the write-up of
    rev.4 of this manuscript.





    37

